TransGAT: Transformer-Based Graph Neural Networks
for Multi-Dimensional Automated Essay Scoring
Hind Aljuaida,∗, Areej Alhothalia, Ohoud Al-Zamzamia, Hussein Assalahib
aDepartment of Computer Science, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Makkah, 21589, Saudi Arabia
bEnglish Language Institute, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Makkah, 21589, Saudi
Arabia
Abstract
Essay writing is a critical component of student assessment, yet manual scor-
ing is labor-intensive and inconsistent. Automated Essay Scoring (AES) of-
fers a promising alternative, but current approaches face limitations. Recent
studies have incorporated Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) into AES using
static word embeddings that fail to capture contextual meaning, especially
for polysemous words. Additionally, many methods rely on holistic scor-
ing, overlooking specific writing aspects such as grammar, vocabulary, and
cohesion. To address these challenges, this study proposes TransGAT, a
novel approach that integrates fine-tuned Transformer models with GNNs
for analytic scoring. TransGAT combines the contextual understanding of
Transformers with the relational modeling strength of Graph Attention Net-
works (GAT). It performs two-stream predictions by pairing each fine-tuned
Transformer (BERT, RoBERTa, and DeBERTaV3) with a separate GAT. In
each pair, the first stream generates essay-level predictions, while the sec-
ond applies GAT to Transformer token embeddings, with edges constructed
from syntactic dependencies. The model then fuses predictions from both
streams to produce the final analytic score. Experiments on the ELLIPSE
dataset show that TransGAT outperforms baseline models, achieving an av-
erage Quadratic Weighted Kappa (QWK) of 0.854 across all analytic scoring
dimensions. These findings highlight the potential of TransGAT to advance
AES systems.
∗Corresponding author
Email address: hhamadaljuaid0001@stu.kau.edu.sa (Hind Aljuaid)
5202
peS
1
]LC.sc[
1v04610.9052:viXra
Keywords: Automated Essay Scoring (AES), Transformer Models, Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs), Graph Attention Networks (GATs), Natural
Language Processing (NLP)
1. Introduction
Essay writing tasks are commonly used in educational settings to assess
a student’s creativity, critical thinking, and subject knowledge. Such tasks
require the ability to collect, synthesize, and present ideas and arguments
(West et al., 2019). Essay-based assessments are integral to a variety of con-
texts, including classroom evaluations, university admissions, and standard-
izedtestssuchasTOEFLandIELTS(ZupancandBosni´c,2018). Evaluation
is typically conducted by educators using structured scoring rubrics designed
to ensure consistency and objectivity. Scoring rubrics generally follow either
a holistic or analytic approach. The holistic scoring assigns a single overall
score based on general writing quality, while the analytical scoring evaluates
multiple dimensions, such as organization, grammar, vocabulary, and cohe-
sion, to provide more detailed feedback on specific writing traits (Li and Ng,
2024a).
Manual evaluation presents several challenges, especially when large vol-
umes of essays must be evaluated within limited timeframes. Even with
clear rubrics, human scoring remains vulnerable to inconsistencies, subjec-
tivity, and rater bias, which may compromise reliability and fairness (Uto
and Okano, 2020). To address these limitations, Automated Essay Scoring
(AES) systems have been developed as a practical and scalable solution. By
leveragingtechniquesfromNaturalLanguageProcessing(NLP)andMachine
Learning (ML), AES systems automatically evaluate written texts with min-
imal human intervention (Uto, 2021; Misgna et al., 2025). This automation
enables consistent and objective scoring, reduces evaluation time and cost,
and supports educational feedback by enabling rapid, large-scale assessments
(Misgna et al., 2025; Ramesh and Sanampudi, 2022).
Early AES systems relied heavily on handcrafted features extracted from
essays, such as lexical, syntactic, grammatical, and content-specific indica-
tors. Although effective to some extent, these feature engineering approaches
require significant manual effort and lack flexibility when adapting to new
traits or tasks (Misgna et al., 2025). To address these limitations, neu-
ral network-based methods were introduced, enabling automatic learning of
2
feature representations directly from text data through word embeddings.
These embeddings encode semantic similarity based on context, eliminating
the need for handcrafted features (Misgna et al., 2025).
Despitetheirsuccess,deeplearningmodelslikeConvolutionalNeuralNet-
works (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) often fail to capture
global dependencies in a corpus, which are essential for holistic understand-
ing. They mostly operate on local sequences of words and lack mechanisms
to model relationships across multiple documents (Yao et al., 2019).
To address this, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have gained attention.
GNNs can model long-range dependencies and global relationships by repre-
senting texts as graphs (Cai et al., 2018). One popular architecture, Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs), introduced by Kipf and Welling (Kipf and
Welling, 2017), has shown promising results in NLP tasks including text
classification (Yao et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020).
Recent studies have applied GCNs to AES, demonstrating their effective-
ness in capturing relationships between essays and enhancing feature extrac-
tion. For instance, Ait et al. (Ait Khayi and Rus, 2020) used TF-IDF and
Word2Vec to represent nodes, capturing both term importance and seman-
tic meaning. Tan et al. (Tan et al., 2023) employed one-hot encoding to
create binary vector representations, while Ma et al. (Ma et al., 2021) used
GloVe embeddings to represent documents, sentences, and tokens, enabling
more comprehensive modeling of semantic structures. These approaches dif-
fer primarily in how graph nodes are represented through word embeddings.
Although AES models have shown promising results, several challenges and
limitations remain. The following outlines these key issues.
• Traditional wordembedding methods, suchas TF-IDF, Word2Vec, and
GloVe, produce static representations that fail to capture contextual
meaning and struggle with polysemy. Consequently, the same em-
bedding is assigned to words used in different contexts, limiting their
effectiveness in tasks like AES. Pre-trained Transformer models ad-
dresstheseshortcomingsbygeneratingdynamic, context-awareembed-
dings that capture rich semantic and syntactic information (She et al.,
2022). However, while Transformers excel at modeling intra-textual
context,theyarelesseffectiveatcapturingrelationshipsacrossmultiple
texts—such as similarities and dependencies among essays. To address
this limitation, recent approaches have combined Transformer-based
models with GCNs, an integration that has proven effective across var-
3
ious NLP tasks, including text classification (She et al., 2022; Gao
and Huang, 2021; Lu et al., 2020; AlBadani et al., 2022). This hybrid
approach leverages the strengths of both architectures: the contex-
tual depth of Transformers and the relational modeling capabilities of
GCNs, resulting in a more robust and comprehensive solution for AES
and other NLP tasks.
• Despite the advantages of GCNs, a notable limitation remains: the
equal treatment of all neighboring nodes, which may lead to subopti-
mal modeling of node relevance. To overcome this issue, Graph At-
tention Networks (GATs), proposed by Veliˇckovi´c et al. (Veliˇckovi´c
et al., 2017), incorporate an attention mechanism that assigns learn-
able weights to neighboring nodes based on their importance. GATs
have achieved promising results across various NLP tasks, such as text
classification and sentiment analysis, demonstrating their effectiveness
in capturing complex relationships within textual data (Haitao and
Fangbing, 2022; Vrahatis et al., 2024). By weighting the importance
of neighboring nodes, GATs enable models to focus more effectively on
the most relevant connections—an advantage particularly beneficial for
AES, where the strength of relationships between essays can vary.
• Most existing AES systems rely on holistic scoring, which assigns a
single score to represent the overall quality of an essay. Although this
approach simplifies the scoring process, it fails to assess specific aspects
of writing such as grammar, vocabulary, coherence, and organization.
Consequently, it limits the ability to provide detailed and targeted
feedback—an essential component in educational contexts, especially
for second-language learners. Holistic scoring does not reflect the full
range of a student’s writing abilities, reducing its effectiveness in iden-
tifying strengths and weaknesses. Despite these drawbacks, much of
the prior research has focused on holistic evaluation, often overlooking
the advantages of analytic scoring, which assigns multiple scores across
distinct writing dimensions and offers more informative feedback to
support writing improvement (Li and Ng, 2024c).
• The Automated Student Assessment Prize (ASAP) dataset, released
as part of a 2012 Kaggle competition, has become the primary bench-
mark for evaluating AES models, but it has notable limitations that
constrain its usefulness for broader AES research. First, the dataset
4
lacks diversity, consisting of essays written by U.S. students in grades
7 to 10, most of whom are native English speakers. This raises con-
cerns about generalizability, particularly when applying AES models
to essays written by second-language learners or students from dif-
ferent educational backgrounds. Second, the structure of ASAP lim-
its its suitability for evaluating models in cross-prompt scoring. AES
researchers have traditionally relied on within-prompt scoring, where
models are trained and tested on the same prompt. However, this
setup is often impractical in real-world applications, as AES models
tend to perform poorly on unseen prompts unless retrained on new
data. In response, researchers have begun exploring cross-prompt scor-
ing, a more challenging setting where models are trained on multiple
prompts and tested on essays from prompts not seen during training.
Although ASAP contains eight prompts across different genres (narra-
tive, persuasive, andsource-based), usingitforcross-promptevaluation
introduces complications, as scoring rubrics and writing expectations
vary by genre (Li and Ng, 2024c,a). Recently, a new dataset has been
introduced to address the limitations of the ASAP dataset. Composed
of essays written by English Language Learners, this dataset features a
larger number of prompts within the same genre (Crossley et al., 2023).
These characteristics make it more suitable for training and evaluating
robust AES models. Further details about the dataset are provided in
the Experiments section.
In conclusion, although current AES models have made considerable ad-
vancements, there is still potential for further development in several areas.
Bytacklingthesechallenges,itispossibletodevelopmoreefficientandadapt-
able AES models that offer deeper, more comprehensive feedback and better
meet the varied requirements of educational environments.
Toaddresstheseshortcomings,thispaperproposestheTransGATmethod,
whicheffectivelycombinesthecontextualrepresentationpowerofpre-trained
TransformerswiththerelationalmodelingcapabilitiesofGATs. Italsolever-
ages an enhanced dataset to train a more robust AES model capable of as-
sessing essays across multiple dimensions. Additionally, this study addresses
another research gap by combining cross-prompt essay scoring with multi-
dimensional essay scoring. This study is the first to integrate Transformer-
based embeddings with GATs for AES while jointly addressing cross-prompt
and multi-dimensional scoring.
5
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a review of re-
lated work in the field of AES. Section 3 presents the proposed methodology,
detailing the integration of Transformer models and GAT. Section 4 sum-
marizes the experiments, including dataset details, evaluation metric used
to assess performance, experimental setup, results obtained, and comparison
to baseline studies. Finally, Section 5 discusses the conclusions and suggests
directions for future research.
2. Related Work
This section categorizes previous studies on the AES task into two groups
based on the rating scales used for writing assessment: holistic scoring and
analytic scoring.
2.1. Holistic Scoring
Researchonholisticessayscoringhasprogressedfromtraditionalmachine
learning methods to deep neural networks and, more recently, to Graph Con-
volutional Networks (GCNs). Traditional machine learning methods relied
on handcrafted features such as vocabulary, sentence length, grammatical
errors, and syntactic complexity (Madala et al., 2018; Sharma and Goyal,
2020). Advanced features, including parse tree depth and type-token ratio,
have also been explored (Salim et al., 2019; Janda et al., 2019; Doewes and
Pechenizkiy, 2020).
Deep learning methods introduced word embeddings to automate fea-
ture extraction, initially using static embeddings like GloVe and Word2Vec
with CNNs, GRUs, LSTMs, and Bi-LSTMs (Chen et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2018; Cai, 2019; Zhu and Sun, 2020; Xia et al., 2019; Muangkammuen and
Fukumoto, 2020; Chen and Li, 2018). Attention mechanisms further en-
hanced performance (Chen and Li, 2018). Transformer-based models, such
as BERT, RoBERTa, and DeBERTa, provided contextualized embeddings
that outperformed static embeddings in AES tasks and yielded improved re-
sults when combined with LSTMs, CNNs, Capsule Networks, and Bi-LSTMs
(Wangkriangkri et al., 2020; Wang, 2023; Sharma et al., 2021; Yang and
Zhong, 2021; Yang et al., 2020; Mayfield and Black, 2020; Susanto et al.,
2023; Beseiso et al., 2021). Hybrid approaches integrated both static and
contextual embeddings to enhance performance (Li et al., 2023; Beseiso and
Alzahrani, 2020; Zhou et al., 2021). However, most deep learning models
6
primarily focus on local word sequences without explicitly capturing global
word relationships (Yao et al., 2019).
GCNs have emerged as a promising method for capturing global rela-
tionships within textual data (Ren et al., 2022; Bhatti et al., 2023). Early
studies applied GCNs to short-answer scoring, leveraging one-hot encoding,
TF-IDF, and Word2Vec embeddings (Tan et al., 2023; Ait Khayi and Rus,
2020). Later research extended GCNs to essay scoring using GloVe embed-
dings (Ma et al., 2021). However, most prior work has primarily focused on
holistic scoring, evaluating overall essay quality without addressing specific
writing aspects.
2.2. Analytic Scoring
Initial research in AES primarily utilized traditional machine learning
algorithms combined with manually engineered features. In recent years,
however, numerous studies have shown that neural network methods can
more effectively capture the deep semantics of essays. For example, Li et
al. (Li and Ng, 2024b) trained a simple neural network using extracted
features as input and achieved state-of-the-art performance. Mathias et al.
(Mathias and Bhattacharyya, 2020) compared a feature-engineering system,
a string kernel-based model, and an attention-based neural network using
GloVe pre-trained word embeddings to automatically extract features for
scoring various essay traits, finding that the neural network delivered the
best results. The introduction of deep learning further automated feature
extraction through word embeddings, with models such as Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Gated Re-
current Units (GRUs), Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs), and
Bidirectional LSTMs (BiLSTMs) showing promising results (Hussein et al.,
2020; Ridley et al., 2021; Shin and Gierl, 2022; Do et al., 2023; Chen and Li,
2023).
More recently, many AES studies have utilized transformer-based pre-
trained language models—such as BERT, DistilBERT, RoBERTa, and De-
BERTa—to obtain essay embeddings, followed by model fine-tuning to op-
timize performance (Lee and Nam, 2021; Xue et al., 2021; Ormerod, 2022;
Lohmann et al., 2024; Sun and Wang, 2024; Chen et al., 2024). Several
studies have enhanced these transformer models by integrating them with
additional deep-learning architectures. For example, Lee et al. (Cho et al.,
2024) incorporated a CNN with the output from BERT to improve local fea-
ture extraction, while another study (Lee et al., 2023) combined RoBERTa
7
with an enhanced Bidirectional GRU (BiGRU) to boost scoring accuracy.
Recent work has also begun to explore the use of large language models
(LLMs), which have shown strong performance in AES tasks (Xiao et al.,
2025).
However, most of these approaches primarily focus on local word se-
quences and often overlook the global relationships between words (Yao
et al., 2019). To address this limitation, GCNs have emerged as a promising
technique for capturing global dependencies within textual data (Ren et al.,
2022; Bhatti et al., 2023). Building on this, the present study integrates
Transformer-based contextual embeddings with GCNs for multidimensional
essay scoring. Transformer models, such as BERT and DeBERTa, provide
rich, context-dependent representations of essays that effectively capture se-
mantic features. By feeding these embeddings into a GCN, the proposed
hybrid approach leverages the strengths of both architectures: the deep se-
mantic understanding from Transformers and the global relational modeling
from GCNs. This combination enhances predictive performance and con-
tributes to more accurate and robust AES outcomes.
3. Methodology
This section presents TransGAT, a hybrid method developed for an-
alytic AES. The method consists of two main components: a fine-tuned
Transformer-based model and a Transformer–GAT model. The first compo-
nent extracts contextual embeddings that capture the semantic features of
each essay. The second component, the Transformer–GAT model, extends
the fine-tuned Transformer by integrating it with a GAT to effectively model
both semantic content and syntactic structure. Within this component, two-
streampredictionsareperformedbypairingeachTransformerwithaseparate
GAT.Ineachpair, thefirststreamgeneratesessay-levelpredictionsusingthe
Transformer, while the second uses Transformer token representations within
GAT, where edges are constructed based on syntactic dependencies. A de-
tailedexplanationofeachcomponentisprovidedinthefollowingsubsections,
with the overall architecture illustrated in Figure 1.
8
Pre-trained Model Fine-Tuned Model
Generic dataset Essays dataset
(large dataset) (small dataset)
Fine-tuning Transformer-based model
ww oo rr dd w wo or rd d word wor wd ord wor wd or wd ord word wor wd ord wor wd or wd ord word P oM oe lia nn g Graph-Level Embedding
word LeakyReLU LeakyReLU LeakyReLU
Graph Input
GAT Layer GAT Layer
Linear Layer
GAT module
1 1 0 ... 0
Stanza NLP toolkit 1 1 1 ... 0
... ... ... ... ...
0 0 1 ... 1
Adjacency Matrix
Syntactic dependency module
syassE
LeakyReLU
Cohesion
Transformer Embedding Dropout Linear Layer Syntax
Transformer module
Vocabulary
Phraseology
Grammar
Conventions
Transformer-GAT model
Figure 1: The overall architecture of the TransGAT method.
3.1. Fine-tuning Transformer-based model
Transformer-based language models like BERT have demonstrated re-
markable performance in NLP tasks (Gillioz et al., 2020), building upon the
Transformer architecture originally proposed by Vaswani et al. (Vaswani,
2017). Unliketraditionalsequentialmodels,theTransformerusesanencoder-
decoder structure that processes entire input sequences simultaneously. Al-
though it does not inherently encode word order, it incorporates positional
encoding to retain sequence information, ensuring that word representations
varybasedontheirpositions. Theself-attentionmechanismallowsthemodel
to capture dependencies between all tokens in a sequence (Vaswani, 2017).
These models are highly effective at learning general-purpose language
representations from large-scale unlabeled corpora, which can be transferred
to various downstream tasks through transfer learning. This process involves
unsupervisedpre-trainingonextensivetextdata, followedbysupervisedfine-
tuning on task-specific datasets to adapt the model to the target domain.
This strategy often yields superior performance compared to training models
9
from scratch (Schomacker and Tropmann-Frick, 2021).
This study evaluates the performance of three Transformer-based pre-
trained models on the AES task, using the large version of each model for
comparison. Each model was fine-tuned on the AES datasets to generate
embeddings tailored to the data, which then served as the foundation for
further processing.
1. BERT, short for ”Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Trans-
formers,” is a foundational model in natural language processing that
introduced a deep bidirectional approach to language understanding.
The large version of BERT, known as BERT-large, consists of 24 lay-
ers and 340 million parameters. It is pre-trained on large corpora using
maskedlanguagemodelingandnext-sentencepredictiontasks, allowing
it to capture context from both directions in a sentence. BERT-large
has achieved strong performance across a wide range of NLP bench-
marks (Devlin et al., 2019).
2. RoBERTa,shortfor”RobustlyOptimizedBERTPre-trainingApproach,”
replicates the original BERT by optimizing hyperparameters and sig-
nificantly increasing the size of the training data. The RoBERTa-large
model, with 24 layers, is pre-trained on five diverse English-language
datasets totaling over 160GB of text. RoBERTa has achieved state-of-
the-art results in several downstream tasks across multiple benchmarks
(Liu et al., 2019).
3. DeBERTa, short for ”Decoding-enhanced BERT with Disentangled At-
tention,” further refines the BERT and RoBERTa models by introduc-
ing two novel techniques: a disentangled attention mechanism and an
enhanced masked decoder. The large version of DeBERTa, DeBERTa-
large, improvespretrainingefficiencyandmodelperformance(Heetal.,
2021).
3.2. Transformer-GAT model
The model consists of four interconnected modules: a Transformer mod-
ule, a syntactic dependency module, a GAT module, and a fusion mod-
ule. The Transformer module leverages a fine-tuned Transformer model (de-
scribed earlier) to extract contextualized embeddings from the input text,
which are then passed through a dense layer to generate essay-level pre-
dictions. At the same time, the syntactic dependency module employs the
Stanza toolkit to parse the syntactic structure of the text and to represent it
10
as an adjacency matrix. In the GAT module, the contextualized word em-
beddings obtained from the fine-tuned Transformer model are used as node
features, while the edges of the graph are defined by syntactic dependen-
cies extracted by the syntactic dependency module. This graph is processed
through two GAT layers, followed by a global mean pooling to generate a
graph-level representation for prediction. Finally, the outputs of the Trans-
former and the GAT modules are fused to produce the final analytic scores.
3.2.1. Transformer module
This module uses the fine-tuned transformer model from the first compo-
nent, which has already been trained on the essay dataset. At this stage, the
Transformer model is frozen, which means that its weights are not updated
during this step. Freezing the model allows us to utilize the pre-learned
representations obtained during fine-tuning without further modification.
The Transformer module extracts contextualized embeddings for the in-
put text. Specifically, it uses the embedding of the special [CLS] token,
which serves as a summary representation of the entire essay. This [CLS] to-
ken embedding, denoted as h ∈ Rd, is then passed through a dense (fully
[CLS]
connected) layer followed by a non-linear activation function, LeakyReLU,
to generate predictions at the essay level for various analytic aspects.
Formally, the dense layer applies a linear transformation using a weight
matrix W ∈ Rk×d and a bias vector b ∈ Rk, where d is the embedding
dimension and k is the number of analytic aspects to predict. The output
vector y ∈ Rk is computed as:
y = LeakyReLU(Wh +b). (1)
[CLS]
Each element of the output vector y corresponds to a predicted score for
one of the k analytic aspects of the essay (such as grammar, cohesion, vo-
cabulary, etc.). This approach enables the model to take advantage of the
richsemanticinformationcapturedbytheTransformer’s[CLS]tokenembed-
ding while producing multi-dimensional outputs aligned with the analytical
scoring criteria.
3.2.2. Syntactic dependency module
Thismoduleconvertseachessayintoasyntactictextgraphtoincorporate
structural linguistic information. The Stanza NLP toolkit is employed to
analyze the syntactic dependency tree of the input text, which identifies
11
grammatical relationships between words such as subject–verb or modifier–
noun connections. This tree is then transformed into an adjacency matrix,
where each entry indicates the presence of a direct syntactic relationship
between a pair of words.
Based on this matrix, a graph G = (V,E) is constructed, where nodes V
(with |V| = n) correspond to the tokens of an essay and x ∈ Rn×d denote
the word embeddings of the input tokens generated by the fine-tuned Trans-
former model, and edges E represent syntactic dependencies between the
tokens. A dependency adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n is built, where A = 1
ij
if there is a syntactic relation between tokens i and j, and 0 otherwise. The
adjacency matrix is then converted into a sparse coordinate format for graph
construction.
(cid:40)
1 if token i is syntactically connected to token j,
A = (2)
ij
0 otherwise.
The entire graph construction process is illustrated in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Graph Construction Using Dependency Relations
Input: Set of tokens T = {t ,t ,...,t }, with their corresponding depen-
1 2 n
dency relations
Output: Graph G = (V,E), where V is the set of tokens and E is the set
of edges based on syntactic relations
Initialization:
1: Construct a dependency adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n such that:
(cid:40)
1 if token i is syntactically connected to token j,
A =
ij
0 otherwise
Graph Construction:
2: for each pair of tokens (i,j) do
3: if A = 1 then
ij
4: Add edge (t ,t ) to the graph G
i j
5: end if
6: end for
7: return G
To enrich the graph structure, the syntactic graph is treated as undi-
12
rected. This representation enables the model to capture syntactic structure
more effectively, which is crucial for assessing analytic aspects such as gram-
mar, clarity, and sentence complexity.
3.2.3. GAT module
After constructing the text graph for each document, information is prop-
agated and updated between nodes using the GAT to obtain node represen-
tations that contain both text syntax and sequence information. Unlike the
standard self-attention mechanism, which assigns attention weights globally
across all nodes, the graph attention mechanism operates locally and does
not require knowledge of the entire graph structure. This allows the model
to flexibly assign different weights to neighboring nodes and to parallelize
computation across all nodes efficiently.
The GAT accepts two inputs: the node features, which are the word
embeddings produced by the fine-tuned Transformer module,
H = {h ,h ,...,h },
1 2 n
where each h ∈ Rm, n is the number of nodes, and m is the number of
i
features per node. The second input is the adjacency matrix A, obtained
through the syntactic dependency module, which captures neighbor relation-
ships among nodes.
Specifically, for a node i and one of its neighbors j, the attention coeffi-
cient e is computed as:
ij
(cid:0) (cid:1)
e = LeakyReLU a⊤[Wh ∥Wh ] , (3)
ij i j
where:
• W is a learnable weight matrix,
• a is a learnable attention vector,
• ⊤ denotes transposition,
• ∥ indicates vector concatenation,
• LeakyReLU is the non-linear activation function.
13
Theattentioncoefficientsarethennormalizedusingthesoftmaxfunction:
exp(e )
ij
α = , (4)
ij (cid:80)
exp(e )
k∈N(i) ik
where N(i) is the set of neighbors of node i.
Using the normalized attention weights, the updated representation of
node i is computed as:
 
(cid:88)
h′
i
= σ α ijWh j, (5)
j∈N(i)
where σ denotes the LeakyReLU activation function.
The GAT layer produces updated node representations:
H′ = {h′,h′,...,h′ },
1 2 n
where each h′ ∈ Rm.
i
After two successive GAT layers, the updated node features are aggre-
gated into a fixed-size graph-level representation using global mean pooling:
h = MeanPooling({h′′}n ), (6)
G i i=1
where h′′ denotes the node representation after the second GAT layer, and
i
n is the number of nodes.
This operation computes the average of all node embeddings across each
feature dimension, resulting in a single graph-level vector representing the
entire essay. The graph-level representation is then passed through a fully
connected linear layer followed by a LeakyReLU activation function to pro-
duce the final prediction:
y = σ(W h +b ), (7)
2 G 2
where W and b are trainable parameters, h is the graph-level embedding,
2 2 G
and σ denotes the LeakyReLU activation function.
3.2.4. Fusion module
The final essay scores are computed as a combination of both the Trans-
former and GAT modules:
yˆ= s +s , (8)
1 2
14
where yˆ∈ RC represents the predicted scores across C assessment criteria.
By incorporating Transformer-based contextual embeddings alongside d-
ependency-parsing-basedgraphattention,themodeleffectivelycapturesboth
semantic meaning and syntactic structure, resulting in a more robust AES
system.
3.3. Training Procedure
Both the Transformer and Transformer-GAT models are trained using
Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss:
6
1 (cid:88)
L = (y −yˆ)2. (9)
MSE i i
6
i=1
where:
• y is the ground-truth score for the i-th analytic trait,
i
• yˆ is the predicted score for the i-th analytic trait,
i
• i indexes the six traits: cohesion, syntax, vocabulary, phraseology,
grammar, and conventions,
• L is the average loss across all six traits.
MSE
4. Experiments and Discussion
This section starts by introducing the datasets utilized in the study, then
outlinestheapproachusedforperformanceevaluation. Itproceedswithade-
scription of the experimental setup. Following that, the experimental results
are presented along with an in-depth analysis and interpretation. Lastly,
the discussion compares the performance of the proposed TransGAT method
against baseline models.
4.1. Dataset
The English Language Learner Insight, Proficiency, and Skills Evaluation
(ELLIPSE) corpus (Crossley et al., 2023) is a publicly available dataset con-
taining approximately 6,500 essays written by English Language Learners
(ELLs) in grades 8–12. These essays were collected from statewide standard-
ized assessments in the United States and span 29 distinct writing prompts.
15
Each essay is annotated with both holistic and analytic proficiency scores, in-
cluding evaluations of cohesion, syntax, vocabulary, phraseology, grammar,
and conventions. On average, the essays contain around 430 words, most
ranging between 250 and 500. Scoring is performed on a scale from 1.0 to
5.0, in 0.5-point increments. Two trained human raters evaluated each essay
to ensure scoring reliability. This corpus addresses the limitations of previ-
ous analytic datasets, such as ASAP++ (Mathias and Bhattacharyya, 2018),
which extended the original ASAP dataset to support analytic scoring but
retained many of its constraints.
4.2. Performance Evaluation
Quadratic Weighted Kappa (QWK) is a statistical metric used to as-
sess the level of agreement between predicted and actual scores, making it
especially well-suited for evaluating AES systems. Unlike basic accuracy
measures, QWK accounts for the extent of disagreement between predicted
and true scores, offering a more detailed evaluation of a model’s performance
(Ramnarain-Seetohul et al., 2022).
The QWK score is computed using the following formula (Ramnarain-
Seetohul et al., 2022):
(cid:80)
w O
i,j i,j i,j
QWK = 1− , (10)
(cid:80)
w E
i,j i,j i,j
where:
• O denotes the observed agreement matrix, which reflects how often
i,j
each predicted score aligns with the actual score.
• E refers to the expected agreement matrix, indicating the level of
i,j
agreement that would be expected by random chance.
• w represents the weight matrix, usually defined as:
i,j
(i−j)2
w = , (11)
i,j (N −1)2
where i and j correspond to the predicted and actual score categories,
and N is the total number of distinct score levels.
16
QWK scores range from -1 to 1. A score of 1 reflects perfect agreement
between the predicted and actual values, while a score of 0 suggests agree-
ment no better than random chance. Negative values imply systematic dis-
agreement. QWK incorporates a quadratic penalty, which means that larger
differences between predicted and actual scores are penalized more heavily.
This feature is especially important in educational settings like AES, where
accuratescoringisessential, andsignificanterrorscanunderminethemodel’s
credibility. As outlined in Table 1, QWK scores can be interpreted to assess
the strength of agreement, with values below 0 indicating no agreement and
those between 0.81 and 1.00 suggesting near-perfect agreement (Ramnarain-
Seetohul et al., 2022).
Table 1: Interpretation of Kappa Values
Kappa Value Interpretation
< 0 No agreement
0.01 - 0.20 Slight agreement
0.21 - 0.40 Fair agreement
0.41 - 0.60 Moderate agreement
0.61 - 0.80 Substantial agreement
0.81 - 1.00 Almost perfect agreement
4.3. Experimental Setup
The experimental setup includes configurations for both Transformer-
based models and GAT models. The maximum input sequence length was
determined based on model capacity: 1024 tokens for DeBERTaV3 to lever-
age its ability to process longer inputs, and 512 tokens for other models,
in line with their architectural constraints. The tokenizers were extended
to recognize special tokens representing paragraph breaks (\n) and double
spaces, which are important for preserving the linguistic structure of essays.
Training and evaluation were conducted using a batch size of 4, and the mod-
els that achieved the best performance on the validation set were saved for
subsequent analysis.
The GAT model comprised two layers and four attention heads and em-
ployedtheLeakyReLUactivationfunction. Bothmodeltypeswereoptimized
usingtheAdamWoptimizer. Thelearningratewassetto1e−5fortheTrans-
former models and 1e−3 for the Transformer-GAT model. A weight decay of
17
1e−2 was applied only to the Transformer models. Both setups utilized a co-
sine learning rate scheduler and were trained for six epochs. No dropout was
applied during training, as this was found to improve regression performance.
4.4. Experimental Results
Extensive experiments were conducted by systematically varying several
key factors to optimize model performance. These included using differ-
ent dependency parsing tools—such as spaCy and Stanza—to construct the
graph structure, tuning dropout rates to prevent overfitting, applying dis-
tinct learning rates for the Transformer and GAT components to balance
their training, experimenting with various optimizers (e.g., Adam, AdamW),
and testing different learning rate schedulers. Additionally, the number of
GAT layers and attention heads, choice of activation functions (e.g., ReLU,
LeakyReLU), and batch sizes were adjusted. These variations helped iden-
tify the optimal configuration for each analytic scoring dimension. The best
results from these experiments are presented in Table 2, which reports QWK
scores on the ELLIPSE dataset across six analytic scoring dimensions: Co-
hesion, Syntax, Vocabulary, Phraseology, Grammar, and Conventions.
Table 2: QWK on ELLIPSE, with best scores in bold.
Model Avg. QWK Cohesion Syntax Vocabulary Phraseology Grammar Conventions
BERT-large-GAT 0.808 0.799 0.809 0.796 0.782 0.861 0.801
RoBERTa-large-GAT 0.854 0.852 0.852 0.825 0.861 0.877 0.859
DeBERTaV3-large-GAT 0.833 0.877 0.853 0.813 0.836 0.872 0.744
RoBERTa-large-GAT achieved the highest average QWK score of 0.854,
reflectingitstopperformanceinfouroutofsixanalyticdimensionsamongthe
GAT variants: Vocabulary (0.825), Phraseology (0.861), Grammar (0.877),
and Conventions (0.859). In contrast, the DeBERTaV3-large-GAT model
demonstrated strong performance in the remaining two dimensions, Cohe-
sion (0.877) and Syntax (0.853), but its lower score in Conventions (0.744)
contributed to a reduced overall average.
These findings underscore RoBERTa’s ability to capture complex linguis-
tic features, making it more suitable for this task than DeBERTaV3. One
possible explanation is that RoBERTa was pre-trained on a significantly
larger corpus (160GB of text) compared to DeBERTaV3’s 78GB, which may
enhance its effectiveness on AES tasks—despite DeBERTaV3 generally out-
performing RoBERTa in other benchmarks (He et al., 2020).
18
4.5. Discussion
Table3presentsacomparativeanalysisoftheproposedTransGATmethod
against two baseline studies, as these are the only studies that utilized the
ELLIPSE dataset.
Table 3: Comparison of baselines vs. TransGAT, with best scores in bold.
ModelGroup Study Model Avg.QWK Cohesion Syntax Vocabulary Phraseology Grammar Conventions
Sunetal.SunandWang(2024) roberta-base 0.825 0.81 0.83 0.84 0.80 0.83 0.84
TransformersModels
Chenetal.Chenetal.(2024) debertaV3-base 0.685 0.63 0.69 0.67 0.69 0.72 0.71
bert-large-GAT 0.808 0.799 0.809 0.796 0.782 0.861 0.801
Transformer-GAT TransGATmethod roberta-large-GAT 0.854 0.852 0.852 0.825 0.861 0.877 0.859
debertaV-large-GAT 0.833 0.877 0.853 0.813 0.836 0.872 0.744
Thebaselinestudies, representedbySunetal. (SunandWang,2024)and
Chen et al. (Chen et al., 2024), employ RoBERTa-base and DeBERTaV3-
base models, respectively. Sun et al.’s RoBERTa-base achieve relatively
strong performance across most dimensions, with a notably high score in
Vocabulary (0.84). Conversely, Chen et al.’s DeBERTaV3-base, despite be-
ing more recent, performs relatively lower across all dimensions, indicating a
less effective adaptation to this task.
The TransGAT method, which integrates GAT with Transformer-based
models, consistently improves performance over the baseline models. Specifi-
cally, theRoBERTa-large-GATvariantshowsthestrongestresultsamongthe
baseline studies, achieving the highest scores in three dimensions: Phrase-
ology (0.861), Grammar (0.877), and Conventions (0.859). Meanwhile, the
DeBERTaV3-large-GATvariantexcelsinCohesion(0.877)andSyntax(0.853),
surpassing the RoBERTa-large-GAT model in these dimensions.
Although the TransGAT method generally outperforms baseline models
across most analytic dimensions, it shows relatively lower performance in
the Vocabulary dimension compared to Sun et al.’s RoBERTa-base model
(0.84). This could be attributed to the fact that vocabulary scoring often re-
lies heavily on surface-level lexical richness and diversity, which the baseline
RoBERTa-base model may capture more directly due to its simpler architec-
ture and focus on token-level representations. In contrast, the integration of
GAT in TransGAT emphasizes relational and contextual information across
essays, which may reduce attention to details lexical features critical for vo-
cabulary scoring.
Overall, the results highlight the advantage of incorporating GAT with
Transformerarchitectures. TheTransGATmethodeffectivelycapturesricher
contextualandrelationalinformationbetweenessays, enablingsuperiormod-
eling of complex linguistic features critical to AES. This is particularly ev-
19
ident in the RoBERTa-large-GAT model’s performance, which outperforms
the baseline RoBERTa-base model across almost all analytic dimensions.
5. Conclusion
This study introduced TransGAT, a novel method for analytic AES that
effectively combines the strengths of Transformer-based models and GAT.
The proposed approach consists of two key components: a fine-tuned Trans-
former that generates rich contextual embeddings, and a GAT that incor-
porates syntactic structure through attention-based graph modeling. This
hybrid design allows TransGAT to capture both semantic content and intra-
essay structural dependencies, enabling a more accurate and nuanced evalu-
ation of writing quality.
A key innovation in TransGAT is its two-stream prediction mechanism,
where one stream produces essay-level predictions using the Transformer,
while the other leverages token-level Transformer outputs within a GAT
framework, using syntactic dependencies to guide edge construction. This
dual approach allows the model to focus dynamically on the most relevant
linguistic and structural features, which is particularly important in AES,
where variations in organization, grammar, and coherence affect scoring.
Extensive experiments conducted on analytic AES tasks demonstrated
that TransGAT consistently outperforms baseline models across multiple
scoring dimensions. The attention-based relational modeling within GAT
enhancesthemodel’sabilitytodifferentiatebetweenessayswithsubtlevaria-
tionsinquality,leadingtomorereliablepredictions. Theseresultsunderscore
the benefit of integrating deep language representations with graph-based re-
lational reasoning in educational NLP.
Looking forward, future work will explore expanding TransGAT with
heterogeneous graph structures that include both word-level and essay-level
nodes, allowing the model to capture more complex interactions across and
within essays. Another promising direction is adapting TransGAT for mor-
phologically rich languages such as Arabic. The unique linguistic features of
Arabic—including its root-based morphology, optional diacritics, and diverse
dialects—pose challenges for conventional NLP pipelines. Addressing these
through Arabic-specific tokenizers, morphological analyzers, and syntactic
parsers will help evaluate the cross-linguistic generalizability of the proposed
approach and contribute to the development of AES tools for underrepre-
sented languages.
20
Acknowledgments
The project was funded by KAU Endowment (WAQF) at king Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. The authors, therefore, acknowledge with
thanks WAQF and the Deanship of Scientific Research (DSR) for technical
and financial support.
References
Ait Khayi, N., Rus, V., 2020. Graph convolutional networks for student
answers assessment, in: Text, Speech, and Dialogue: 23rd International
Conference, TSD 2020, Brno, Czech Republic, September 8–11, 2020, Pro-
ceedings 23, Springer. pp. 532–540.
AlBadani, B., Shi, R., Dong, J., Al-Sabri, R., Moctard, O.B., 2022.
Transformer-based graph convolutional network for sentiment analysis.
Applied Sciences 12, 1316.
Beseiso, M., Alzahrani, S., 2020. An empirical analysis of bert embedding
for automated essay scoring. International Journal of Advanced Computer
Science and Applications 11.
Beseiso, M., Alzubi, O.A., Rashaideh, H., 2021. A novel automated essay
scoring approach for reliable higher educational assessments. Journal of
Computing in Higher Education 33, 727–746.
Bhatti, U.A., Tang, H., Wu, G., Marjan, S., Hussain, A., 2023. Deep learning
with graph convolutional networks: An overview and latest applications
in computational intelligence. International Journal of Intelligent Systems
2023, 8342104.
Cai, C., 2019. Automatic essay scoring with recurrent neural network, in:
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on High Performance
Compilation, Computing and Communications, pp. 1–7.
Cai,H.,Zheng,V.W.,Chang,K.C.C.,2018. Acomprehensivesurveyofgraph
embedding: Problems, techniques, and applications. IEEE transactions on
knowledge and data engineering 30, 1616–1637.
21
Chen, M., Li, X., 2018. Relevance-based automated essay scoring via hi-
erarchical recurrent model, in: 2018 International Conference on Asian
Language Processing (IALP), IEEE. pp. 378–383.
Chen,S.,Lan,Y.,Yuan,Z.,2024. Amulti-taskautomatedassessmentsystem
for essay scoring, in: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Education, Springer. pp. 276–283.
Chen, Y., Li, X., 2023. Pmaes: prompt-mapping contrastive learning for
cross-prompt automated essay scoring, in: Proceedings of the 61st annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long
papers), pp. 1489–1503.
Chen, Z., Quan, Y., Qian, D., 2020. Automatic essay scoring model based
on multi-channel cnn and lstm, in: BenchCouncil International Federated
Intelligent Computing and Block Chain Conferences, Springer. pp. 337–
346.
Cho, M., Huang, J.X., Kwon, O.W., 2024. Dual-scale bert using multi-trait
representations for holistic and trait-specific essay grading. ETRI Journal
46, 82–95.
Crossley, S., Tian, Y., Baffour, P., Franklin, A., Kim, Y., Morris, W., Benner,
M., Picou, A., Boser, U., 2023. The english language learner insight,
proficiency and skills evaluation (ellipse) corpus. International Journal of
Learner Corpus Research 9, 248–269.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2019. Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, in: Proceed-
ings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the associ-
ation for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume
1 (long and short papers), pp. 4171–4186.
Do, H., Kim, Y., Lee, G.G., 2023. Prompt-and trait relation-aware cross-
prompt essay trait scoring, in: Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: ACL 2023, pp. 1538–1551.
Doewes, A., Pechenizkiy, M., 2020. Structural explanation of automated
essay scoring., in: EDM.
22
Gao, W., Huang, H., 2021. A gating context-aware text classification model
withbertandgraphconvolutionalnetworks. JournalofIntelligent&Fuzzy
Systems 40, 4331–4343.
Gillioz, A., Casas, J., Mugellini, E., Abou Khaled, O., 2020. Overview of
the transformer-based models for nlp tasks, in: 2020 15th Conference on
computer science and information systems (FedCSIS), IEEE. pp. 179–183.
Haitao, W., Fangbing, L., 2022. A text classification method based on lstm
and graph attention network [j]. Connection Science 34, 2466–2480.
He, P., Gao, J., Chen, W., 2021. Debertav3: Improvingdebertausingelectra-
style pre-training with gradient-disentangled embedding sharing (2021).
URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2111.09543 .
He, P., Liu, X., Gao, J., Chen, W., 2020. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert
with disentangled attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03654 .
Hussein, M.A., Hassan, H.A., Nassef, M., 2020. A trait-based deep learning
automated essay scoring system with adaptive feedback. International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 11.
Janda, H.K., Pawar, A., Du, S., Mago, V., 2019. Syntactic, semantic and
sentiment analysis: The joint effect on automated essay evaluation. IEEE
Access 7, 108486–108503.
Kipf, T.N., Welling, M., 2017. Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks, in: International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (ICLR).
Lee, I., Nam, H., 2021. Automated essay scoring using recurrence over bert
(robert). Applied Linguistics 37, 7–28.
Lee, Y., Jeong, S., Kim, H., Kim, T.i., Choi, S.W., Kim, H., 2023. Nc2t:
Novel curriculum learning approaches for cross-prompt trait scoring, in:
Proceedingsofthe46thInternationalACMSIGIRConferenceonResearch
and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 2204–2208.
Li, F., Xi, X., Cui, Z., Li, D., Zeng, W., 2023. Automatic essay scoring
method based on multi-scale features. Applied Sciences 13, 6775.
23
Li, S., Ng, V., 2024a. Automated essay scoring: Recent successes and future
directions, in: Proceedings of the 33rd International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Jeju, Republic of Korea.
Li, S., Ng, V., 2024b. Conundrums in cross-prompt automated essay scoring:
Making sense of the state of the art, in: Proceedings of the 62nd annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long
papers), pp. 7661–7681.
Li, S., Ng, V., 2024c. Icle++: Modeling fine-grained traits for holistic essay
scoring, in: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8458–8478.
Li, X., Chen, M., Nie, J., Liu, Z., Feng, Z., Cai, Y., 2018. Coherence-based
automated essay scoring using self-attention, in: Chinese computational
linguistics and natural language processing based on naturally annotated
big data. Springer, pp. 386–397.
Liu, X., You, X., Zhang, X., Wu, J., Lv, P., 2020. Tensor graph convolutional
networks for text classification, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference
on artificial intelligence, pp. 8409–8416.
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis,
M., Zettlemoyer, L., Stoyanov, V., 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized
bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .
Lohmann, J.F., Junge, F., M¨oller, J., Fleckenstein, J., Tru¨b, R., Keller, S.,
Jansen, T., Horbach, A., 2024. Neural networks or linguistic features?-
comparing different machine-learning approaches for automated assess-
ment of text quality traits among l1-and l2-learners’ argumentative essays.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education , 1–40.
Lu, Z., Du, P., Nie, J.Y., 2020. Vgcn-bert: augmenting bert with graph
embedding for text classification, in: European Conference on Information
Retrieval, Springer. pp. 369–382.
Ma, J., Li, X., Chen, M., Yang, W., 2021. Enhanced hierarchical structure
features for automated essay scoring, in: China Conference on Information
Retrieval, Springer. pp. 168–179.
24
Madala, D.S.V., Gangal, A., Krishna, S., Goyal, A., Sureka, A., 2018. An
empiricalanalysisofmachinelearningmodelsforautomatedessaygrading.
Technical Report. PeerJ Preprints.
Mathias, S., Bhattacharyya, P., 2018. Asap++: Enriching the asap auto-
mated essay grading dataset with essay attribute scores, in: Proceedings of
the eleventh international conference on language resources and evaluation
(LREC 2018).
Mathias, S., Bhattacharyya, P., 2020. Can neural networks automatically
score essay traits?, in: Proceedings of the Fifteenth Workshop on Innova-
tive Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pp. 85–91.
Mayfield, E., Black, A.W., 2020. Should you fine-tune bert for automated
essay scoring?, in: Proceedings of the Fifteenth Workshop on Innovative
Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pp. 151–162.
Misgna, H., On, B.W., Lee, I., Choi, G.S., 2025. A survey on deep learning-
based automated essay scoring and feedback generation. Artificial Intelli-
gence Review 58, 1–40.
Muangkammuen, P., Fukumoto, F., 2020. Multi-task learning for automated
essay scoring with sentiment analysis, in: Proceedings of the 1st Confer-
ence of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 10th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing: Student Research Workshop, pp. 116–123.
Ormerod, C.M., 2022. Mapping between hidden states and features to val-
idate automated essay scoring using deberta models. Psychological Test
and Assessment Modeling 64, 495–526.
Ramesh, D., Sanampudi, S.K., 2022. An automated essay scoring systems: a
systematic literature review. Artificial Intelligence Review 55, 2495–2527.
Ramnarain-Seetohul, V., Bassoo, V., Rosunally, Y., 2022. Similarity mea-
sures in automated essay scoring systems: A ten-year review. Education
and Information Technologies 27, 5573–5604.
Ren, H., Lu, W., Xiao, Y., Chang, X., Wang, X., Dong, Z., Fang, D.,
2022. Graph convolutional networks in language and vision: A survey.
Knowledge-Based Systems 251, 109250.
25
Ridley, R., He, L., Dai, X.y., Huang, S., Chen, J., 2021. Automated cross-
prompt scoring of essay traits, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence, pp. 13745–13753.
Salim, Y., Stevanus, V., Barlian, E., Sari, A.C., Suhartono, D., 2019. Au-
tomated english digital essay grader using machine learning, in: 2019
IEEE International Conference on Engineering, Technology and Educa-
tion (TALE), IEEE. pp. 1–6.
Schomacker,T.,Tropmann-Frick,M.,2021. Languagerepresentationmodels:
An overview. Entropy 23, 1422.
Sharma, A., Kabra, A., Kapoor, R., 2021. Feature enhanced capsule net-
works for robust automatic essay scoring, in: Joint European Conference
on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Springer.
pp. 365–380.
Sharma,S.,Goyal,A.,2020. Automatedessaygrading: Anempiricalanalysis
of ensemble learning techniques, in: Computational Methods and Data
Engineering: Proceedings of ICMDE 2020, Volume 2. Springer, pp. 343–
362.
She, X., Chen, J., Chen, G., 2022. Joint learning with bert-gcn and multi-
attention for event text classification and event assignment. IEEE Access
10, 27031–27040.
Shin, J., Gierl, M.J., 2022. Evaluating coherence in writing: Comparing
the capacity of automated essay scoring technologies. Journal of Applied
Testing Technology , 04–20.
Sun, K., Wang, R., 2024. Automatic essay multi-dimensional scoring with
fine-tuning and multiple regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01198 .
Susanto, H., Gunawan, A.A.S., Hasani, M.F., 2023. Development of auto-
mated essay scoring system using deberta as a transformer-based language
model, in: Proceedings of the Computational Methods in Systems and
Software. Springer, pp. 202–215.
Tan, H., Wang, C., Duan, Q., Lu, Y., Zhang, H., Li, R., 2023. Automatic
short answer grading by encoding student responses via a graph convolu-
tional network. Interactive Learning Environments 31, 1636–1650.
26
Uto, M., 2021. A review of deep-neural automated essay scoring models.
Behaviormetrika 48, 459–484.
Uto, M., Okano, M., 2020. Robustneuralautomatedessayscoringusingitem
response theory, in: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Education, Springer, Cham. pp. 549–561.
Vaswani, A., 2017. Attentionisallyouneed. AdvancesinNeuralInformation
Processing Systems .
Veliˇckovi´c, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Lio, P., Bengio, Y.,
2017. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903 .
Vrahatis, A.G., Lazaros, K., Kotsiantis, S., 2024. Graph attention networks:
a comprehensive review of methods and applications. Future Internet 16,
318.
Wang, J., 2023. A study of scoring english tests using an automatic scoring
modelincorporatingsemantics. AutomaticControlandComputerSciences
57, 514–522.
Wangkriangkri, P., Viboonlarp, C., Rutherford, A.T., Chuangsuwanich, E.,
2020. A comparative study of pretrained language models for automated
essay scoring with adversarial inputs, in: 2020 IEEE REGION 10 CON-
FERENCE (TENCON), IEEE. pp. 875–880.
West, H., Malcolm, G., Keywood, S., Hill, J., 2019. Writing a successful
essay. Journal of Geography in Higher Education 43, 609–617.
Xia, L., Liu, J., Zhang, Z., 2019. Automatic essay scoring model based on
two-layer bi-directional long-short term memory network, in: Proceedings
of the 2019 3rd International Conference on Computer Science and Artifi-
cial Intelligence, pp. 133–137.
Xiao, C., Ma, W., Song, Q., Xu, S.X., Zhang, K., Wang, Y., Fu, Q., 2025.
Human-aicollaborativeessayscoring: Adual-processframeworkwithllms,
in: Proceedings of the 15th International Learning Analytics and Knowl-
edge Conference, pp. 293–305.
Xue, J., Tang, X., Zheng, L., 2021. A hierarchical bert-based transfer learn-
ing approach for multi-dimensional essay scoring. Ieee Access 9, 125403–
125415.
27
Yang, R., Cao, J., Wen, Z., Wu, Y., He, X., 2020. Enhancing automated
essayscoringperformanceviafine-tuningpre-trainedlanguagemodelswith
combination of regression and ranking, in: Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 1560–1569.
Yang, Y., Zhong, J., 2021. Automatedessayscoringviaexample-basedlearn-
ing, in: International Conference on Web Engineering, Springer. pp. 201–
208.
Yao, L., Mao, C., Luo, Y., 2019. Graph convolutional networks for text clas-
sification, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
pp. 7370–7377.
Zhou, X., Yang, L., Fan, X., Ren, G., Yang, Y., Lin, H., 2021. Self-trainingvs
pre-trained embeddings for automatic essay scoring, in: China Conference
on Information Retrieval, Springer. pp. 155–167.
Zhu, W., Sun, Y., 2020. Automated essay scoring system using multi-model
machine learning. MLNLP, BDIOT, ITCCMA, CSITY, DTMN, AIFZ,
SIGPRO .
Zupanc, K., Bosni´c, Z., 2018. Increasing accuracy of automated essay grad-
ing by grouping similar graders, in: Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics, pp. 1–6.
28