Mentalic Net: Development of RAG-based
Conversational AI and Evaluation Framework for
Mental Health Support
Anandi Dutta Shivani Mruthyunjaya Jessica Saddington
Texas State University Texas State University Texas State University
San Marcos, USA San Marcos, USA San Marcos, USA
anandi.dutta@txstate.edu aon9@txstate.edu tgg55@txstate.edu
Kazi Sifatul Islam
Texas State University
San Marcos, USA
kazi_sifat@txstate.edu
Abstract— The emergence of large language models (LLMs) bias testing, and privacy/security testing, along with human
has unlocked boundless possibilities, along with significant evaluation. We proposed a workflow on how it can be
challenges. In response, we developed a mental health support integrated into the therapist’s workflow, supported by data-
chatbot designed to augment professional healthcare, with a
driven analysis, ultimately augmenting the professional
strong emphasis on safe and meaningful application. Our
healthcare process. In the second phase, our strategy will
approach involved rigorous evaluation, covering accuracy,
extensively incorporate input and evaluations from
empathy, trustworthiness, privacy, and bias. We employed a
behavioral health experts, therapists, and regular user
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) framework, integrated
prompt engineering, and fine-tuned a pre-trained model on feedback. This technology can potentially have a significant
novel datasets. The resulting system, Mentalic Net positive impact if managed and developed properly [24].
Conversational AI, achieved a BERT Score of 0.898, with other Eventually, the final goal is to develop a holistic evaluation
evaluation metrics falling within satisfactory ranges. We framework for this technology that can ensure AI standards
advocate for a human-in-the-loop approach and a long-term, and quality assurance of this technology.
responsible strategy in developing such transformative
technologies, recognizing both their potential to change lives and
This is still a work-in-progress and proof-of concept project.
the risks they may pose if not carefully managed.
The purpose of this project is to explore this open-ended
Keywords—Large Language Model; retrieval-augmented domain, gain insights, and contribute to developing
generation (RAG); Conversational AI; Responsible AI meaningful and safe technology in this emerging field.
Moreover, our development targets the general public,
I. INTRODUCTION aiming to support common well-being and mental health
Digital mental health solutions, particularly conversational issues. This is not intended for handling severe issues or
Artificial Intelligence (AI), present a promising opportunity diagnosis.
to address limitations in mental health support. In the USA,
as of September 30, 2021, an estimated 126.9 million people
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
lived in one of the professional shortage areas. There are
about 5,930 federally designated areas identified as Mental
Health Professional Shortage Areas[1]. Conversational AI,
A. Chatbot Development in the Healthcare Domain
often implemented as chatbots, has the potential to bridge the
growing gap between mental health needs and the capacity of
The implementation of chatbots within varied contexts for
available resources by providing accessible and convenient
different applications has shown very promising results in
assistance not only in the USA but also worldwide. This
supporting individuals in achieving their corresponding aims.
technology can democratize access to mental health resources
The “Habit Bot” is designed to support users in habit change
and can provide support in a stigma-free, 24-hour available
through personalized interaction [20]. The chatbot enabled
environment. However, this open-ended technology must be
the clear definition of a chatbot's strong ability to support
developed with a long-term strategy and a human-in-the-loop
individuals in changing their unconscious routines or
approach to mitigate research challenges, such as those
behaviors that don’t serve them. Similarly, chatbots have
related to empathy, trustworthiness, privacy, and bias. In the
been implemented within a medical context with the aim of
first stage, we focused on developing the chatbot and
providing logical support to medical professionals for better
performed rigorous evaluation, including technical testing,
diagnosis and better patient care. Another study developed a rather than heavily fine-tuned. Das et al. fine-tune or prompt
personalized medical healthcare assistant, fine-tuned its large LLMs (GPT-4, Nous- Hermes, etc.) on clinical queries;
model, applied prompt engineering, and utilized a robust their two-layer RAG uses off-the-shelf GPT models to
RAG pipeline [17]. Another study evaluated mental health summarize retrieved text, with no additional task-specific
chatbots’ sentiment response, but only through technical fine-tuning mentioned.
measures [15]. In another study, Schyff et al. [18] provided a
roadmap for self-assessment and self-help utility utilizing RAG systems retrieve from knowledge bases such as ICD-
Conversational AI. On the other hand, Loh et al. [19] 11, clinical guidelines, and user-generated posts. Datasets
demonstrated that large language models demonstrated include DSM-5 cases, Reddit Q&A on psychoactive
promising results in generating empathetic responses in a substances, and mental health surveys. These diverse sources
comparative study. We conclude that further research is enable the generation of a contextually rich and up-to-date
needed in this area due to its open-ended nature, the information.
complexity of human behavior, and the nuances of language.
Moreover, our study emphasizes both a thorough/robust Metrics include BLEU, ROUGE, BERTScore, and human
technical evaluation and meaningful integration of human expert ratings. Evaluations measure factual accuracy,
judgment in the development process. In this work, we relevance, empathy, and safety. Human judgments are
primarily tested the technical robustness of our model with a essential, especially for mental health applications.
limited human-in-the-loop approach. However, our next step
is to extensively incorporate input and evaluations from In summary, RAG-based conversational agents in healthcare
behavioral health experts, therapists, and regular user combine pre-trained LLMs with the retrieval of domain
feedback. knowledge to improve accuracy and relevance. Evaluation
combines automated metrics with expert review, showing
Recent years have seen the rapid adoption of retrieval- potential for safe, empathetic mental health support.
augmented generation (RAG) to make large language models Challenges remain in ensuring data privacy, reducing biases,
(LLMs) more factual and context-aware in healthcare. In and maintaining real-world relevance.
RAG, a retriever (e.g. BM25 or vector search) selects relevant
documents or knowledge (from medical texts, guidelines, Compared to other works, our work contributes to four key
patient records, etc.), and an LLM conditions on that retrieved areas: Novel Dataset Creation; Development (combining
content to generate its response. By grounding generation in RAG, fine-tuning, and prompt engineering); a holistic and
a trusted knowledge base, RAG can boost factual accuracy rigorous Evaluation Framework; and a proposed Framework
and reduce hallucinations [2]. This is especially important in to augment the therapist’s workflow.
sensitive domains like medicine and mental health, where
incorrect or outdated advice can lead to serious
consequences. Here, we focus on system architectures,
retrieval mechanisms, fine-tuning strategies, datasets,
III. METHODOLOGY
evaluation metrics, and validation for the literature review. We developed a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
based Conversational AI system tailored for mental health
Typical RAG pipelines combine a retriever and an LLM. For support. First, we curated a comprehensive knowledge base
instance, Das et al.[3] designed a two-layer RAG system for comprising verified mental health resources, including
medical question answering: the first layer retrieves relevant clinical guidelines, self-help materials, and publicly available
Reddit posts (via a simple BM25-based engine) and has the counseling datasets. We implemented a retriever component
using a hybrid of BM25 and dense vector search (e.g., FAISS
LLM summarize them; the second layer composes a final
with sentence embeddings) to efficiently fetch relevant
answer. Similarly, LLMind Chat [4] uses an open-domain
documents in response to user queries. For generations, we did
retriever over the ICD-11 mental health taxonomy. Its RAG
fine-tune a pre-trained large language model (e.g.,
model is built on Gemma-2 (a 27B-parameter open LLM) and
TinyLLaMA) using domain-specific dialogues and question-
a custom ICD-11 knowledge base, so that the chatbot can
answer pairs, with retrieval outputs as context. We also used
fetch precise diagnostic information in real time. Silva et al.
prompt engineering to enhance empathy and appropriateness.
[5] implement MentalRAG, a multi-agent framework where
Evaluations included automated metrics (BLEU, ROUGE,
one agent uses a RAG pipeline over clinical guidelines
BERT Score) and human evaluation to assess factual
(stored in a ChromaDB vector store) to generate therapy accuracy, relevance, and safety. We performed rigorous bias
proposals. In all cases, the retriever is a crucial component. and privacy/security audits to ensure ethical deployment. Fig.
Some systems (e.g. Das et al.) use keyword/BM25 search 1 and Fig. 2 show the flowchart of the development process.
(e.g. Whoosh with Okapi BM25 ), while others employ vector We consider the “development” and “evaluation” process as
embeddings (e.g. a ChromaDB store in MentalRAG). The adaptive, iterative, and concurrent.
choice of retrieval source reflects domain needs: LLMind
A. Dataset Selection
Chat draws on the ICD-11 manual, Das et al. query Reddit
mental-health forums, and MentalRAG retrieves from Our primary focus was to ensure responses with emotionally
evidence-based psychiatric guidelines. empathetic and professional dialogue, in order to support
users' sensitivity and conversational flow. We identified
several datasets that not only contained high-quality human
Most works start with a strong pre-trained LLM and fine-tune
verbal interactions but also displayed a diversity of emotional
or prompt it for the healthcare domain. In LLMind Chat, a
situations, mental health relevance, and realistic
27B-parameter Gemma-2 model is prompted (with retrieval)
conversational structure. The first dataset chosen was the mental health knowledge as well as advice. Several websites,
Empathetic Dialogues Dataset from Facebook, AI, available such as the National Institute of Mental Health [8], CDC [9],
at Kaggle. This dataset [6] includes 25,000 conversations MedlinePlus [10], and SAMHSA[11] were utilized to create
this dataset.
The fourth dataset [12] was the “psychology-10k” which
contained user questions and the fitting chatbot responses. The
dataset consisted of about 10k dialogue examples crafted to
support the development of conversational AI systems for
mental health. The dataset presents a patient’s input and an
emotionally supportive psychiatrist’s response. The fifth
dataset that was chosen to be implemented was the
“MentalChat16K[13]”, which was found through
Huggingface. This dataset consists of 6338 question-answer
pairs derived from 378 anonymized interview transcripts
collected during PISCES clinical trials. The transcripts
documented interactions between behavioral health coaches
and caregivers of patients in palliative or hospice care. The
transcripts were paraphrased using the Mistral Model for the
privacy of the individuals involved, prior to the release of the
dataset. The rest of the available question-answer pairs were
synthetically created utilizing OpenAI's GPT-3.5 Turbo
model. The synthetic data covered a range of 33 different
Fig. 1: A Flowchart Illustrating the Concurrent/Adaptive/Iterative
mental health topics, including anxiety, depression,
Development and Evaluation Process
relationships, and family conflict.
B. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) Implementation
To implement the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG),
all the selected datasets were formatted into a combined
JSONL file, following a question and answer format. This was
implemented by saving the file within a private google drive,
and allowing the program to access the google drive through
an external link to load in the required information during the
chatbot setup.
There were several different reasons that supported our choice
to utilize RAG within the context of a mental health
conversation AI chatbot. The first was the known behavior
and inclination of language models to “hallucinate” and
respond with information that may not be professionally
accurate or relevant for the given situation. But the application
of RAG for the chatbot computation reduces the hallucinatory
behavior of the language model. In addition, it is
computationally conducive to allow the chatbot to retrieve the
information that it finds most relevant for a specific situation,
instead of training the model on all domain-specific data. It is
Fig. 2: Flowchart of Mentalic Net Conversational AI Development immensely supportive that one does not need to entirely re-
train a model to include more domain-relevant knowledge,
grounded in specific emotional contexts, supporting a model’s
and the knowledge can simply be updated.
ability to handle a wide variety of emotional expressions or, at
times, the appropriate level of apathy when needed. Most We implemented Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to
existing chatbots seem to be very affirming of user actions, improve the accuracy, relevance, and scalability of our
however this dataset supports both the acknowledgement of conversational AI. RAG comprises two key components: a
user feelings but also allows for growth-oriented language as retriever that extracts relevant information from an external
well. knowledge base, and a language model that utilizes this
information to generate responses. Due to the warm,
The second dataset [7] was from GitHub, named “Counsel
professionally supported, and strong responses used for our
Thoughts”. Due to its advice-oriented format, incorporation of
knowledge base, we indirectly tuned the format and tone of
context, and professional tone, it was deemed crucial to tune
the chatbot responses. This enables the system to deliver more
the chatbot. Most importantly, this dataset was anonymized
accurate and contextually grounded answers while avoiding
from counselor responses to real-world therapeutic questions.
hallucinations often associated with generative models
The combination of the different datasets strongly supports the
operating in isolation.
well-rounded fine-tuning of the selected model to ensure
emotionally intelligent yet professional language. To prepare the knowledge base for the RAG retrieval pipeline,
we implemented a document loading function that would
The third dataset [8] implemented within the chatbot was
process the large collection of conversation data stored in the
created by us. There exist several different open-source,
json file. Each line in this file contains a question-answer pair.
reputable websites that focus on providing information about
The “answer” contains the technical, core content that would tuned for conversational use, it is computationally
be retrieved during the inference to create the chatbot’s lightweight, and it is fast. One key reason for this choice was
response. The function reads each line, parses the JSON the TinyLlama’s transformer architecture, which is proven to
object, and creates a Document object using the answer as the be well-suited for modern language understanding and
main content (page_content) and the associated question as generation. Through its implementation of self-attention for
metadata under the "title" field. This structure ensures that the
sequence modeling, FlashAttention for efficiency on long
documents remain linked to their original context while
inputs, and RoPE (Rotary Position Embeddings) for encoding
prioritizing the factual content for indexing. To maintain the
sequence order, it is well suited to support the development
quality and the ease of implementation, the function filters out
of a chatbot.
any documents that are decidedly short (less than 50
characters). This ensured that the remaining indexed answers
We also deployed prompt engineering as part of our process.
in the knowledge base were meaningful and well-formatted
The prompt is mentioned below. It was considered to be
text.
during model output generation: “You are a compassionate,
After filtering was completed, the documents were processed emotionally intelligent mental health assistant. Your role is to
using the CharacterTextSplitter, which breaks longer answers support users with warmth, honesty, and practical insight —
into smaller, overlapping text chunks of 600 characters each, like a trusted peer or counselor.
with about a 0 character overlap. The process of chunking
Instructions:
supports the retrieval process by guiding the system to return
- Begin by validating the user's feelings in a natural, grounded
more targeted segments of text in response to user questions,
tone. Avoid sounding robotic, clinical, or overly cheerful.
rather than entire document indexes. These split “documents”
- Speak with empathy and clarity — like a calm friend who
are then passed to the vector embedding pipeline for indexing
genuinely understands.
and retrieval. To ensure that RAG operates with maximum
- Use casual, everyday language that feels safe and
effectiveness, undertaking data pre-processing and
approachable.
segmenting prior to embedding is vital.
- Keep responses concise (about 2–4 sentences) unless the
The second aspect of the RAG implementation involves the user asks for more detail.
response generation from the knowledge base available. When - When appropriate, offer **one clear, low-effort action** the
a user submits a query, the query is embedded into the same
user can try immediately (e.g., breathing technique, reflection
vector space, and the system retrieves the top-k, optimized to
prompt, or mental shift).
a value of 6, most relevant answers based on cosine similarity.
- Do NOT offer generic advice, toxic positivity, or clichés.
These retrieved sections are then passed to a language model
Be specific, real, and kind.
as contextual input, allowing it to generate a well-suited and
- Never fabricate facts or cite sources not found in the given
contextually relevant response.
context.
C. Model Selection, Fine-Tuning Process, and User Data - Only use provided context if it directly helps the user’s
Encryption/Protection current concern.
Several different models were considered to be utilized to be - Focus on soothing emotional distress, building trust, and
tuned to be a mental health chatbot; each had their own offering useful next steps.”
benefits and drawbacks. Some seemed to be too significantly
large in size, and many were initially intended to be utilized to Within this format, we were able to receive appropriate
construct the chatbot, but it was identified that they could not responses for different user inputs. After having the RAG
be utilized for commercialization and distribution. Other implementation effectively set up, we moved to identifying
attributes were also considered, such as those which were at the best configuration parameters for the model. For the
least somewhat inclined towards coherent responses to regular current state of the chatbot, the main aspects of fine-tuning
questions. We decided to create the first instance of the that were undertaken were through RAG and the alteration of
chatbot towards eventual strong development, choosing a the configuration parameters. The process was undertaken to
model that would have a strong foundation to build upon in
ensure that the model was providing contextually relevant
terms of its conversational abilities, contextual awareness, and
responses and was providing professionally supported mental
minimal size would be beneficial. As any future development
health advice to users.
after being perfected in its application could be replicable with
larger or other models, possibly better suited.
The process was undertaken by initially setting each
In order to directly create a prototype of the chatbot, parameter to a safe estimated value, and through iterative use
something tangible that could be reviewed and then further of the chatbot, we were able to identify and optimize each
developed upon, we decided to implement the RAG protocol parameter. Initially the configuration parameters were a
with the datasets above, as well as a prompted focus on the max_new_tokens value of 600, a temperature of 0.7, a top_p
selected “TinyLlama-1.1B-Chat-v1.0” tuned version of the of 0.9, a repetition_penalty of 1.3, and a context_length" of
model. This was obtained from the specific Huggingface 2048. In order to minimize the length of the chatbot responses
page of “TheBloke/TinyLlama-1.1B-Chat-v1.0-GGUF” for conciseness, the max_new_tokens was lowered to 500.
[14]. The temperature parameter which affects the “randomness”
of the output chosen, was lowered so that there was more
The TinyLlama-1.1B-Chat-v1.0-GGUF model is a compact predictability. The “top_p” parameter was significantly
language model built upon the architecture and tokenizer of lowered such that the conversational creativity more closely
Llama 2. There were several reasons for the use of this model followed the provided conversation format. This allowed for
for chatbot development. This model was previously fine- more focused and less diverse outputs. The repetition penalty
was lower, allowing the model to elaborate further on prior relevant documents was recorded. The Precision and Recall
statements without restriction. The final model configuration scores of RAG Efficiency Testing are 0.51 and 0.86. A recall
was chosen to be a "max_new_tokens" value of 500, a score of 0.86 demonstrates that the retriever successfully
"temperature" value of 0.65, a "top_p" of 0.3, a found 86% of all the truly relevant documents in the
repetition_penalty of 1.1, and finally the same knowledge base. This high recall ensures that most of the
necessary information is readily available for the language
context_length of 2048.
model, thereby reducing the likelihood of omitting key
These choices allowed for a well performing mental health
content in responses. We prioritized achieving a high recall
chatbot with emotionally supportive language and
score to ensure no critical information is missed. However, we
professionally approved mental health resources/advice.
aim to improve the precision score to at least 0.7.
Finally, we implemented an external secure storage process While a precision score of 0.51 may initially suggest limited
of the encrypted version of the user’s chat history and output, retrieval accuracy, the interpretation of the score must
for a specific encrypted input. This process was completed consider the context of the open-ended and conversational
using a webhook_url for a Google Sheet, and functions were nature of the knowledge base implemented. A manual
created to encrypt data properly. We ensured that we captured observation and thorough review of the retrieved documents
the time and date of the interaction with the chatbot. This demonstrated that they contained contextually relevant
information aligned with the user queries, despite not being
information was stored within a Google Sheets document.
exact matches to all entries in the ground truth. The visual
IV. EVALUATION OF THE DEVELOPED CONVERSATIONAL AI review of the retrieved documents showed that they provided
useful content embedded within natural language structure,
Following the completion of the first version of the chatbot, a
reflecting situational significance, tonal appropriateness, or
rigorous evaluation process was undertaken to ensure its
responses partially aligned with the semantic meaning of the
reliability, effectiveness, and privacy assurance. We
documents within the selection of ground truth documents.
generated/created a 500 samples dataset for the evaluation
Therefore, we are able to confirm the practical effectiveness
process. The dataset contains User Question, Chatbot’s
of the retrieval system, despite the precision score
Response, and Standard/Ideal Response. All the
underrepresenting its true performance.
standard/ideal responses are created by humans with
meticulous care and supported by medical texts. The language Our conversational AI system achieved a BERT score of
quality metrics of the chatbot were assessed by the BERT 0.898 reflecting a high level of semantic accuracy, surpassing
Score. BERT Score captures (Fig. 3) meaning rather than the performance of all the categorized BERTScore F1
exact words, which is crucial for mental health applications presented in [23], derived from testing another constructed
where empathy and contextual appropriateness matter. The mental health chatbot. In comparison to generative models,
score is 0.898, which indicates that the chatbot’s outputs are our model outperforms DialogGPT (F1 = 0.7603) and GPT-2
highly semantically similar to the ground-truth references. (F1=0.7445) as discussed in [22], indicating comparatively
strong contextual semantic accuracy. Another study focused
on constructing a conversational AI system completed testing
using several benchmarks, including the MELD, MultiDialog,
and IEMOCAP [21]. Upon comparison, we can see that our
model achieved a greater score BERT during evaluation with
our constructed “Standard Ideal/Response,” demonstrating
the strength of our model in achieving semantic relevance
during response generation.
We performed the Perplexity testing. Perplexity scores (Fig.
4) measure the model’s ability to predict a sequence of words,
with lower perplexity indicating better predictive
Fig. 3: Distribution of BERT score performance. Perplexity is the exponential of the average
negative log-likelihood of the correct token. We conducted
this test on 500 samples, and it provided a perplexity score for
each “user input”. It provided us with better insights into
which “user inputs” surprised our model. The average
perplexity score is 25. However, we identified some questions
such as “What is my love language?” “Can people truly
change their core personality?” “How are you today?” ”How
do early attachment styles affect my relationships?” ”My
physical pain makes it hard to stay positive.” demonstrated
high perplexity scores (100 to 200). However, for most of the
user inputs, the perplexity score is low (0 to 20).
Fig. 4: Distribution of Perplexity score
To evaluate the effectiveness of the RAG retrieval, specific
questions from the RAG were chosen, then, utilizing the
chosen method, the “relevant” documents were retrieved. The
precision of retrieving the “correct” documents and other
Evaluation Scores/Satisfactory several users and increased usage length. All the tests turned
Metrics out satisfactory. The various evaluations provided insights
BERT Score 0.898 into potential improvements for the chatbot's next iteration
and an assessment of its current quality. Table 1.
Perplexity
Demonstrates detailed compilation of all the evaluation
Score
metrics.
Here, the first column
is the perplexity score and the second column is the
number of user inputs/questions V. INTEGRATION INTO THERAPIST’S WORKFLOW
RAG Recall: 0.86 We would also like to propose the possibility of the
Efficiency integration of this chatbot into the therapist’s workflow. This
Score Precision: 0.51
chatbot can be deployed as a smartphone/web application.
Fine-Tuning 3.68 (training); 3.40 (validation); *This can be improved The current version is a web version (Fig. 5). This provides
Loss with larger dataset
the possibility of tracking/monitoring the user’s conversation
Response For 50 questions, the average response time was 13.8 log and providing meaningful data-driven insights to the
Time
therapist. Due to the scarce resources and long
Load Testing Completed 50 requests in 6.49 seconds appointment/waiting time, the digital measure of remote
Simulation monitoring could be a very helpful alternative. Eventually, it
PII Leakage Satisfactory can also alert the professionals/caregivers if a person’s mental
Detection health deteriorates and encourages the user to seek immediate
Prompt Satisfactory professional support. We created a synthetic dataset to
Injection demonstrate this approach. In Fig. 6, the calendar plot can be
Testing
created based on the sentiment analysis of conversation logs
Bias Testing Satisfactory and shared with the therapist based on the user’s permission.
with Human In Fig. 7, a radar chart was created based on three months’
Evaluation
conversation logs. The radar chart presents a comparative
analysis of average sentiment scores for various emotions
Table 1: Evaluation Metrics of Mentalic Net across January, February, and March. The emotions are
mapped along the axes, including happiness, hopefulness,
motivation, neutrality, sadness, tiredness, anger, and anxiety.
The chart reveals consistently high sentiment scores for
“happy” and “hopeful” emotions across all months,
suggesting a generally positive mood trend. Conversely,
“angry” and “sad” sentiments display consistently low
scores, indicating these emotions were less prominent.
Interestingly, February shows a slight increase in motivation
compared to January and March, while March exhibits
slightly higher levels of sadness and tiredness. This
visualization highlights both the stability and subtle shifts in
emotional sentiment over the three-month period, offering
insights into patterns that may reflect seasonal influences or
changes in external factors affecting emotional well-being.
This is a demonstration of how this Mentalic Net
Conversation AI has the possibility of augmentation of the
therapist’s workflow, if not a better understanding of self-
assessment and state of mind. It can track a user’s mood over
a long period of time, until the person finally has the
opportunity/will to receive professional help.
Fig. 5: Mentalic Net Interface: A Conversationl AI for mental health support
and integration/augmentation to Therapist’s Workflow
In addition to the other evaluations, bias and fairness checks
were conducted to identify and mitigate any issues with
chatbot’s responses stemming from any
Fig. 6: Remote monitoring of User’s Mental Health based on Conversation
cultural/religious/gender/demographic context. Human
Logs’ Sentiment Analysis
evaluation was performed for bias and fairness testing with
specific curated questions and answers. It turned out to be
satisfactory.
The security and privacy of the chatbot were evaluated
through implementing PII leakage detection, prompt injection,
and load testing simulations to assess system behavior with
Spadaro, J. Perrone, and A. Sarker, “Two-layer retrieval-augmented
generation framework for low-resource medical question answering using
Reddit data: Proof-of-concept study,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 27, p.
e66220, 2025, doi: 10.2196/66220.
[4] unimib-whattadata, “llmind-chat,” GitHub repository, [Online].
Available: https://github.com/unimib-whattadata/llmind-chat. [Accessed:
May 30, 2025].
[5] F. R. E. Silva, P. A. Santos, and J. Dias, “MentalRAG: Developing an
agentic framework for therapeutic support systems,” in Proc. 11th Int.
Conf. Inf. Commun. Technol. Ageing Well e-Health (ICT4AWE), 2025,
pp. 46–57, doi: 10.5220/0013267400003938.
[6] A. Jairath, “Empathetic Dialogues (Facebook AI) 25k,” Kaggle,
[Online]. Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/atharvjairath/empathetic-dialogues-
facebook-ai. [Accessed: May 30, 2025].
[7] N. Bertagnolli, “counsel-chat,” GitHub repository, [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/nbertagnolli/counsel-chat. [Accessed: May 30, 2025].
[8] National Institute of Mental Health, “Health Topics,” [Online].
Available: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics. [Accessed: May 30,
2025].
[9] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Managing Stress,” Mental
Health, Aug. 16, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/mental-
Fig. 7: Remote monitoring of User’s Mental Health based on Conversation health/living-with/index.html. [Accessed: May 30, 2025].
Logs’ Sentiment Analysis
[10] National Library of Medicine, “MedlinePlus,” [Online]. Available:
https://medlineplus.gov. [Accessed: May 30, 2025].
VI. CONCLUSION [11] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, “MentalHealth.gov,”
[Online]. Available: https://www.mentalhealth.gov. [Accessed: May 30,
Again, this is the first version of the chatbot. The initial
2025].
results demonstrated the strong potential of an effective tool
[12] S. Höglund, “psychology-10k,” Hugging Face, [Online]. Available:
for both general users and healthcare professionals. The
https://huggingface.co/datasets/samhog/psychology-10k. [Accessed: May
reported BERT score is 0.898, and the reported RAG score is 30, 2025].
0.51. Moreover, all initial load testing, security testing, and
[13] J. Xu, T. Wei, B. Hou, P. Orzechowski, S. Yang, R. Jin, R. Paulbeck,
response time came out as satisfactory. The perplexity scores
J. Wagenaar, G. Demiris, and L. Shen, “MentalChat16K: A Benchmark
are acceptable. We performed human evaluation for bias Dataset for Conversational Mental Health Assistance,” Hugging Face,
testing. For the first version, we considered 500 samples, but 2024. [Online]. Available:
we will increase the sample size for later versions. https://huggingface.co/datasets/ShenLab/MentalChat16K. [Accessed: May
30, 2025].
In the next phase, we will perform a detailed evaluation with [14] TheBloke, “TinyLlama-1.1B-Chat-v1.0-GGUF,” Hugging Face,
[Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/TheBloke/TinyLlama-1.1B-
a selected general user focus group. Moreover, we will
Chat-v1.0-GGUF. [Accessed: May 30, 2025].
include behavioral health researchers and professional
therapists’ evaluations. Based on the feedback from these [15] M. D. R. Haque and S. Rubya, “An overview of chatbot-based mobile
mental health apps: Insights from app description and user reviews,” JMIR
crucial evaluations, we will update and improve the currently
Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 11, p. e44838, May 2023, doi: 10.2196/44838.
developed conversational AI. Moreover, we are interested in
[16] A. Thakkar, A. Gupta, and A. De Sousa, “Artificial intelligence in
extending our research on the disadvantages of this kind of
positive mental health: A narrative review,” Front. Digit. Health, vol. 6, p.
technology, such as digital fatigue, alienation from friends
1280235, Mar. 2024, doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2024.1280235.
and family, and over-dependence. This work is part of a long
[17] K. P. Suryavanshi, "A Novel RAG-Based Pipeline Leveraging
line of future work and is still in the developmental phase.
BioBERT for Personalized Healthcare Recommendations," M.Tech. thesis,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Vellore Institute of
Technology, Vellore, India, Dec. 2024.
REFERENCES
[18] E. van der Schyff, B. Ridout, K. Amon, R. Forsyth, and A. Campbell,
“Providing self-led mental health support through an artificial intelligence–
powered chat bot (Leora) to meet the demand of mental health care,” J.
[1] H. Modi, K. Orgera, and A. Grover, "Exploring Barriers to Mental Med. Internet Res., vol. 25, p. e46448, 2023, doi: 10.2196/46448.
Health Care in the U.S.," AAMC Research and Action Institute, Oct. 10,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.aamcresearchinstitute.org/our- [19] S. B. Loh and A. S. Raamkumar, “Harnessing large language models’
work/issue-brief/exploring-barriers-mental-health-care-us. [Accessed: empathetic response generation capabilities for online mental health
May30,2025]. counselling support,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08017, Oct. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08017.
[2] J. Miao, C. Thongprayoon, S. Suppadungsuk, O. A. Garcia Valencia,
and W. Cheungpasitporn, “Integrating retrieval-augmented generation with [20] A. F. Mand Arabi, C. Koyuturk, M. O'Mahony, R. Calati, and D.
large language models in nephrology: Advancing practical applications,” Ognibene, “Habit Coach: Customising RAG-based chatbots to support
Medicina (Kaunas), vol. 60, no. 3, p. 445, Mar. 2024, doi: behavior change,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19229, Dec. 2024. [Online].
10.3390/medicina60030445. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.19229.
[3] S. Das, Y. Ge, Y. Guo, S. Rajwal, J. Hairston, J. Powell, D. Walker, S. [21] Y. Kim, S. J. Park, and Y. M. Ro, "Empathetic Response in Audio-
Peddireddy, S. Lakamana, S. Bozkurt, M. Reyna, R. Sameni, Y. Xiao, S. Visual Conversations Using Emotion Preference Optimization and
Kim, R. Chandler, N. Hernandez, D. Mowery, R. Wightman, J. Love, A. MambaCompressor," arXiv, vol. 2412.17572v1, Dec. 2024. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/html/2412.17572v1. [Accessed: 22-Aug-2025].
[22] A. Srivastava, I. Pandey, M. S. Akhtar, and T. Chakraborty, "Response-
act Guided Reinforced Dialogue Generation for Mental Health Counseling,"
Proc. of PBL, vol. 572195, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://cai.iiitd.ac.in/upload/pdf/pbl/572195.pdf. [Accessed: 22-Aug-2025].
[23]. X. Yao, M. Mikhelson, S. C. Watkins, E. Choi, E. Thomaz, and K. de
Barbaro, "Development and evaluation of three chatbots for postpartum
mood and anxiety disorders," arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07407, Aug. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.07407.
[24] D. B. Olawade, O. Z. Wada, A. Odetayo, A. C. David-Olawade, F.
Asaolu, and J. Eberhardt, “Enhancing mental health with artificial
intelligence: Current trends and future prospects,” J. Med. Surg. Public
Health, vol. 3, p. 100099, Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.glmedi.2024.100099.