R : Mining Defensive Patterns in Ethereum via
AVEN
Semantic Transaction Revert Invariants Categories
Mojtaba Eshghie 1, Melissa Mazura2, Alexandre Bartel1,
1Umea˚ University, Sweden
2KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
Abstract—We frame Ethereum transactions reverted by an invariant is a concrete instance where a contract’s defense
an invariant–require(<invariant>)/ assert(<invariant>)/ was triggered—often reflecting a prevented exploit, misuse,
(cid:44)→ if (<invariant>) revert statements in the contract
bot behavior, or economically unprofitable trade [11]. Up to
implementation–as a positive signal of active on-chain defenses.
November 2nd, 2025, Ethereum contains 71379564 failed
Despite their value, the defensive patterns in these transactions
remain undiscovered and underutilized in security research. We transactions to smart contracts (out of the total more than
presentRAVEN,aframeworkthatalignsrevertedtransactionsto 3 billion transactions recorded on-chain) [12]. However, it is
the invariant causing the reversion in the smart contract source not clear which invariants or invariant categories caused these
code, embeds these invariants using our BERT-based fine-tuned
reverts. This creates a paradox where the literature studies
model,andclustersthembysemanticintenttominedefensivein-
successfulexploits[10],[13]andreplicatesthem[2],[3],[14],
variantcategoriesonEthereum.Evaluatedonasampleof20000
reverted transactions, RAVEN achieves cohesive and meaningful but the defenses that successfully prevented the attacks and
clustersoftransaction-revertinginvariants.Manualexpertreview malicious interactions are understudied.
of the mined 19 semantic clusters uncovers six new invariant Research on smart-contract invariants has advanced in dy-
categories absent from existing invariant catalogs, including
namic invariant mining from successful transactions [15]–
feature toggles, replay prevention, proof/signature verification,
[18],staticinvariantsynthesis[6],[19],[20],andvulnerability
counters, caller-provided slippage thresholds, and allow/ban/bot
lists.Todemonstratethepracticalutilityofthisinvariantcatalog detection using invariants [1], [4], [5]. These approaches rely
mining pipeline, we conduct a case study using one of the on expert-curated invariant catalogs as templates or training
newly discovered invariant categories as a fuzzing oracle to data[6],[15],[17],[18],[21],yetnonesystematicallyusereal-
detect vulnerabilities in a real-world attack. RAVEN thus can
world transaction-reverting invariants as actionable defenses.
map Ethereum’s successful defenses. These invariant categories
Existing reverted-transaction studies examine only surface-
enable security researchers to develop analysis tools based on
data-driven security oracles extracted from the smart contract’s levelpatternssuchasemittedevents[11],whileLiuetal.[22]
working defenses. provideacode-levelanalysisof3866contracts,butdonotlink
Index Terms—Smart Contracts, Invariants, Clustering theirstaticfindingstorealon-chainreversionreasons.Thus,no
comprehensivecategorizationconnectsrevertedtransactionsto
I. INTRODUCTION the source-level invariants that triggered them.
Smart contract invariants are used as oracles in verification We present RAVEN1 , a tool to identify semantic clusters
tools [1]–[4], runtime monitors [5], or deployable defenses of transaction revert invariants. RAVEN (1) collects revert
within the contract’s implementation [6]. They are imple- invariants from the source code of Ethereum contracts with
mented using require(<invariant>) / assert(<invariant>) / failed transactions (2) neurally embeds them, and (3) clusters
if (<invariant>) revert/throw; statements in Solidity lan- the embedded invariants by intent (e.g., access control, value
guage [7], [8], and can revert the atomic execution of a bounds, etc.). Organizing reversion invariants into coherent
transactionontheblockchain.Theyenforcesecurityproperties categories, RAVEN provides an empirically grounded view of
such as access control, value bounds for asset transfers, the Ethereum ecosystem’s working defenses.
and temporal constraints. Literature identifies the existence This paper makes the following contributions:
of millions of unique invariant implementations in Solidity • RAVENBERT: A BERT-based embedding model2 fine-
contractsontheEthereum[9].Yetourunderstandingofwhich tuned on a set of revert-inducing transaction invariants on
defensivepatternsintheseinvariantsactuallyworkinthewild Ethereum extracted from 100k failed transactions.
remains limited. • A methodology to discover the best configuration for se-
Despitebillionsofdollarslosttoincidentsandattacks[10], mantic clustering of invariants.
research on decentralized application security mostly involves • A catalog of 19 categories of invariants found by RAVEN,
post-mortem analyses of incidents (defense mechanism fail- and labeled by manual review, resulting in the discovery of
ures). Meanwhile, the blockchain continuously emits a richer six previously unreported defensive invariant categories.
signal:reverted transactions.Everyrevertedtransactiondueto
1https://github.com/mojtaba-eshghie/Raven/
Emails:{mojtabae,alexandre.bartel}@cs.umu.se;mazura@kth.se. 2https://huggingface.co/MojtabaEshghie/RavenBERT
5202
ceD
72
]RC.sc[
1v61622.2152:viXra
• A dataset of 20k failed Ethereum transactions attributes, Invariant Clustering
such as the reversion invariants and their localization in- Representation Algorithm
formation in the source code3, such as reversion invariant,
Lexical
function, and contract.
TF-IDF K-Means
• Acasestudydemonstratingthepracticalutilityof RAVEN’s Failure
findings by using the newly discovered “proof verification” Invariants Transformer Semantic
invariantcategorytoconstructafuzzingoraclethatsuccess- -based DBSCAN Invariant
Failure CodeBERT Clusters
fully detects the Nomad Bridge incident’s vulnerability. Messages
Our study is guided by three research questions: SmartBERT
HDBSCAN
• RQ1 (Clustering Intrinsic Quality Evaluation). Does RAVENBERT
RAVEN generate compact, well-separated groups of invari-
ants based on well-known intrinsic clustering quality met- Fig. 1: RAVEN’s pipeline for semantic clustering of revert-inducing
transaction invariants.
rics? Answer: RAVEN’s best configurations produce com-
pact, well-separated clusters of invariants with a Silhouette
A. Invariant Representations
score of 0.93 and S Dbw score of 0.043.
To develop a comprehensive embedding space, we con-
• RQ2 (Coverage–Quality Trade-off). What fraction of in-
sider two feature representations: i) a lexical token-based
variants is clustered (non-noise), and how does this trade
offwiththesemanticqualityofclustering?Answer: RAVEN embedding, TF-IDF [23], which counts the occurrence of
tokensintheinputsequence,andii)encoder-onlytransformer
showsaclearcoverage–qualitytrade-offwiththehighestse-
mantic clustering quality at 52–58% coverage of invariants. modelsbasedonBERT[24],whichtransforminputintoneural
representations. When embedded in these spaces, semantic
• RQ3(MeaningfulnessofMinedInvariantGroups).Does
similarity between data points corresponds to geometric prox-
RAVEN generate meaningful invariant groupings based on
human reviews? Answer: Manual analysis reveals that the imity [25], and enables clustering based on similarity metrics.
We use cosine similarity to capture semantic differences
clustersaremeaningfulandnon-overlapping.Partialoverlap
between invariants, as it has been successfully utilized in
of generated cluster labels with previous invariant catalogs
shows the clustering validity, and the newly discovered six prior works [26]. Using both token-based vectorization and
transformer-based embeddings enables a rigorous comparison
invariant categories show the semantic effectiveness of both
of their impact on the quality of clustering.
RAVEN’s design and parameter grid search methodology.
• RQ4 (Effectiveness in Vulnerability Detection). Can the 1) Lexical Vectorization: We utilize the Term Frequency-
invariant categories discovered by RAVEN be used to detect Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) [23] vectorization to
vulnerabilitiesinreal-worldcontracts?Answer:Acasestudy transform Solidity/Vyper invariants into sparse vector repre-
on the Nomad Bridge incident demonstrates that invariant sentations. Due to its capability to detect Type 1 and Type
categories discovered by RAVEN (specifically, proof verifi- 2 clones, which do not require deep code understanding,
cation checks) can be effectively translated into actionable this embedding serves as a string-based baseline for other
fuzzing oracles to detect complex upgrade vulnerabilities. representations to compare against [27].
Our work presents the first study on the feasibility of using 2) Transformer-Based Embedding: To capture richer se-
clustering on transaction revert invariants to understand the manticandsyntacticfeaturesofinvariants,weinvestigatethree
defensive patterns behind Ethereum blockchain contracts. pretrained transformer models designed for code understand-
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II ing [28]. Out of the encoder, decoder, and encoder-decoder
presents RAVEN’s design. Section III provides the datasets transformer model families, we only use the encoder family
used in our experiments. Section IV details the evaluation for embedding models. All three of our tested encoder-only
protocol for RAVEN. Section V presents the results while models belong to the BERT family [24].
Section VI discusses the implication of the results, threats to CodeBERT: A general code model based on the BERT
validity,andopenquestions.SectionVIIreviewsrelatedworks transformer used for a baseline of the embedding models.
and Section VIII concludes the paper. SmartBERT-v2: This is a domain-specific model for smart
contract sources [29]. SmartBERT-v2 is pre-trained on a
II. SYSTEMARCHITECTURE
corpus of 16k Solidity files.
Grouping invariants causing the transactions to revert on
RAVENBERT: Pretrained models have proven effective for
Ethereum provides insights into underlying contract defenses.
capturing semantic representations, but they lack invariant-
To achieve this, we design the semantic clustering pipeline
specific domain knowledge. Therefore, we use SmartBERT-
of RAVEN in Figure 1 that uses both lexical and neural em-
v2 as a smart contract-aware pre-trained model and further
bedding models, including RAVENBERT for invariant feature
fine-tune it on failure-inducing invariants. Other models, such
representation (see Section II-A). After embedding the invari-
as SolBERT [26] and SmartEMBED [30], are also tailored
ants, we employ clustering algorithms to discover semantic
to Solidity code through CFG/AST representations of the
transaction-reverting invariant groups (Section II-B).
program, which makes them unsuitable for ad hoc invariant
3https://huggingface.co/datasets/MojtabaEshghie/raven-dataset fine-tuning (they are not trained directly on source code).
Motivated by the fine-tuning approaches employed in related
Test set:
models, such as CodeBERT [31], which utilizes Masked Lan- Failed Revert stack to
Transactions 100k source map Failure Invariants
guage Modeling (MLM), and SolBERT [26], which leverages
Dataset requ"sireen(md s ngo.st eonwdneer,r "); Failure Messages
contrastive learning, we experimented with both methods to ~ 6.3 million Train set: Dynamic Analysis
identify the most effective fine-tuning approach for RAVEN. 20k
We first employed Masked Language Modeling (MLM) [24],
Fig. 2: Failure invariant dataset collection pipeline.
a pretraining technique where random tokens in the input
sequence are masked, and the model learns to predict them rameters:theneighborhoodradiusεandtheminimumnumber
using bidirectional context. MLM is the standard pretraining of points to form a cluster. Density-based clustering partitions
objectiveforBERT-familymodelsandhasproveneffectivefor data based on regions of high density, using a threshold [25].
general-purpose code understanding tasks. We hypothesized Moreover,hierarchicalDBSCAN(HDBSCAN[36])clustering
that further MLM fine-tuning on invariant-specific code could algorithm forms a tree-like structure to capture data groups
help the model capture domain-specific token distributions by iteratively splitting data based on similarity. K-Means [34]
and syntactic patterns unique to guard predicates. However, is chosen for its effectiveness with spherical, well-separated
despite training with reduced epochs (down from 3 to 1) to clusters, and DBSCAN [35] is utilized for its performance
preventoverfitting,MLMfine-tuningresultedinslightlyworse for clustering with noise. HDBSCAN [37] is an improvement
performancecomparedtothebaseSmartBERT-v2model.This over DBSCAN through hierarchical analysis, providing im-
suggests that MLM’s token-level prediction objective, while provedperformanceinscenarioswithvaryingclusterdensities.
effective for pretraining, does not directly optimize for the RAVEN therefore uses these three clustering algorithms: K-
semantic similarity structure needed for clustering tasks on Means [34], DBSCAN [35], and HDBSCAN [37].
invariants.Next,weemployedcontrastivelearning[32],aself-
supervisedtechniquethatlearnsrepresentationsbycontrasting
III. DATASETCOLLECTION
similar(positive)anddissimilar(negative)pairsofdatapoints. TotrainandevaluateRAVEN,wecollectedtwodatasets.We
The core principle is to pull semantically similar items closer use the first for fine-tuning our embedding model, RAVEN-
together in the embedding space while pushing dissimilar BERT, and the second dataset is used for the end-to-end
items apart, thereby creating a representation space where evaluation of RAVEN. Both of these are subsets of a total
cosine similarity reflects semantic relatedness. To implement of 6313121 failed transactions on Ethereum in the time span
contrastive learning for RAVEN, we generated pseudo-labeled ofJune15th,2024(block20100158),untilMarch28th,2025
pairs by computing cosine similarity across our dataset of (block 22145000). To prevent data leakage from training to
invariants. We used a similarity threshold (0.8) to automati- test, we ensured non-overlapping training and test sets.
callycreatepositivepairs(semanticallysimilarinvariants)and Fine-tuning Dataset: To provide a high number of invariants
negative pairs (semantically dissimilar invariants). We gener- for fine-tuning the model, this collection includes 100000
ated16470contrastivepairsofinvariantsusingthisapproach. randomly selected failed transactions. Utilizing the invari-
These artificially labeled pairs served as ground truths during ant extraction pipeline in Figure 2 to accumulate the data
the fine-tuning process, guiding the model to learn invariant- yielded 1932 unique invariants (using string similarity).
specific semantic distinctions beyond what SmartBERT-v2’s Evaluation Dataset: Given the computational demand of the
contract-level pretraining provided. This approach proved to dynamic analysis necessary for retrieving transaction invari-
besignificantlybetterintermsofembeddingqualityandisthe ants at scale, instead of fine-tuning/evaluating RAVEN on
foundation of RAVEN’s success in representing smart contract millions of failed Ethereum transactions to date, we employ
invariants. We perform L2 normalization after embedding the a sampling strategy to strike a balance between feasibility
predicates to ensure all vectors lie on the unit sphere, making based on resources and statistical significance. To deter-
cosine distance a proper metric for clustering. mine a statistically representative sample size, we employed
Cochran’s formula [38], [39]. We defined our parameters for
B. Clustering Algorithm
a 95 % confidence level and a ± 1 % margin of error.
To systematically group invariants and detect previously We remained conservative by assuming maximum population
undiscovered groups of invariants, we employ a suite of variability (p = 0.5), which is the standard practice when
clustering algorithms to determine the most effective one. the true distribution of the data is unknown. The calculation
Semantic clustering is a technique for data analysis used yieldedarequiredminimumsampleof9604transactionsfrom
in Natural Language Processing (NLP) [33], which groups the population of 6313121. The actual sample used in our
phrasestogetherbasedontheirsemanticsimilarity.Clustering evaluationis20000transactions,whichsubstantiallysurpasses
has evolved into distinct types. Partitioning clustering [25] the mentioned minimum requirement.
divides data points into k clusters based on an objective func-
A. Transaction Invariant Extraction
tion.K-Means[34]isonesuchwidelyusedalgorithmthatdi-
vides data by minimizing the within-cluster variance. Another Thedatasetcollectionbeginsbyretrievingbasictransaction
widely used algorithm is Density-Based Spatial Clustering of informationforeachtransactionhash.Thisincludesthetrans-
ApplicationswithNoise(DBSCAN)[35]whichrequires2pa- action’s sender address, receiver address, gas used, gas price,
TABLE I: Schema of the collected dataset.
revert 6,033
DatasetAttribute Description
require 5,660
no source code found 4,660 hash Transactionhash
out of gas 2,420 failure reason Shortdescriptionofwhythetransactionfailed
block number Blocknumberofthetransaction
failures 600 from address Sender’sEthereumaddress
assert 529 to address Receiver’sEthereumaddress
arith. under/overflow 84 tx input Inputdatasentwiththetransaction
div/mod by zero14 gas Gasusedbythetransaction
gas price Gaspricespecifiedforthetransaction
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 gas limit Maximumgasallowed
Count value Ethervaluetransferred
tx index Transaction’spositionwithinitsblock
Fig. 3: Summary of the failure categories in the test set. failure message Errormessagefromsimulation
failure invariant Extractedconditionthatcausedthefailure
gas limit, timestamp, block number, value, transaction index, failure file Filepathorsourcelocationofthefailure
failure function Nameoffunctionwherefailureoccurred
and transaction input. This stage also gives us a preliminary
failure contract Contractaddressinvolvedinfailure
transaction failure reason, which helps us filter the ones that timestamp Timestampofthetransaction
will not constitute a transaction reverted with an invariant,
“Out of gas” errors at 2420 items (12.1%).Authors manually
ruling out cases that do not require further dynamic analysis.
validated a randomly-selected subset of 1000 transactions to
These preliminary errors fall into two categories: 1) “Out
ensure the extraction results are valid.
of gas” failures, where the transaction exceeded its allowed
gas limit. These have the "Out of gas" string in their error
C. Final Dataset Contents
messages. 2) Arithmetic failures: These include overflow,
underflow, and division by zero. Since Solidity 0.8.0, these TableIpresentsthefinaldatasetschemacontainingdetailed
are automatically reverted upon detection [40]. information about failed Ethereum transactions, including
Ifthetransactiondoesnotfallintooneoftheabove,werun metadata (e.g., timestamp and transaction index), participants
a dynamic analysis tool to extract the exact stack frame that (sender and receiver), execution context (gas, input, value),
reverts the transaction and retrieve the invariant in the source andfailureattributes(reason,message,invariant,sourceavail-
code based on it, using bytecode-to-source mapping. We ability, and revert localization details in the source code).
conductthedynamicanalysisstepusingTenderly’sAPIs[41].
The mined information in this step includes the line number IV. EVALUATIONPROTOCOL
and contract identifier where the error originated. For verified
This section defines how we search for the best configura-
contracts, we map line numbers to the source code file and
validate the correctness of the determined line number and
tion of RAVEN to generate meaningful and reliable clusters.
invariant by Tenderly based on the fetched verified source
After fine-tuning RAVENBERT, we use a grid search to
code from Etherscan. Therefore, we skip and remove the
find the optimal clustering parameters of RAVEN. We then
generatethesemanticclustersforthetestdatasetandcompute
failed transactions where the “to” address is not a verified
the metrics defined in Section IV-B to answer RQ1–RQ2.
contract.Weflagandreportthesetransactionswith“nosource
Section IV-C presents the protocolfor manually analyzing the
code”.Whentracingtherevertedtransaction’slaststackframe
identified semantic clusters (RQ3), and Section IV-D outlines
resolvestoavalidLoCintheverifiedsourcecode,weextract
our case study protocol (RQ4).
the predicate from one of the three statements in Solidi-
ty/Vyper sources: assert, require, or if (...)revert/throw,
with the addition of the optional error message in case of A. Experimental Setup
require/assert. We use the non-overlapping sets from §III: (i) a fine-tuning
After extracting the invariants, we de-duplicate their set to set of 100000 failed transactions yielding 1932 unique invari-
have a unique dataset of failed transaction invariants. The de- ants (used only to train RAVENBERT), and (ii) an evaluation
duplicationprocessreducedthesampleto727uniqueinvariant sample of 20000 failed transactions, from which we extract
patterns(3.6%).Amongthese,396containederrormessages. and deduplicate predicates into 727 unique invariants. We
Invariant strings with errormessages averaged 53.9 characters considertwoviewsforeachextractedinvariant:predicate-only
in length, while those without averaged 37.4 characters. and predicate+message (when an error string exists). In the
embedding layer, neural models use their native tokenizers,
B. Failure Invariants Characteristics
and embedding vectors are L2-normalized.
As Figure 3 shows, out of 20k initial randomly selected After running the experiments, we compare the four
failed transactions, we extracted 12222 invariants (61.1%) encoders defined in §III–§II-B: TF–IDF, CodeBERT,
(revert, require, and assert bars in Figure 3). Extraction fail- SmartBERT-v2, and RAVENBERT (contrastively fine-tuned
ures comprising 600 instances (3%). All other (non-invariant) on both invariant views). We use the cosine distance as
transaction reversion reasons contained 7178 cases (35.89%). the metric for semantic similarity in clustering. During the
Among non-invariant failures, “No source code found” is clustering, density-based clustering algorithms (DBSCAN
the largest category with 4660 entries (23.3%), followed by and HDBSCAN) assign a label of −1 to noise points.
TABLE II: Hyperparameter ranges for grid search.
• C2 (Coverage floor): Coverage ≥50% over invariants,
Algorithm Parameters • C3 (Stability): metrics unchanged to two decimals over two
K-Means k∈[8,100] re-runs (same seed) to guard against nondeterminism.
DBSCAN ϵ∈[0.1,5],min samples∈[10,15]
Hyperparameter Search. For each configuration triple (in-
HDBSCAN ϵ∈[0.1,1],min cluster size∈[10,15]
variant embedding, clustering algorithm, invariant view), we
B. Evaluation Metrics (RQ1 and RQ2 Protocols) grid-search to find admissible settings through the hyperpa-
A ground-truth labeling of invariants does not exist (prior rameter ranges defined in Table II. The k ≥8 lower bound
dynamic miners like Trace2Inv [15] and InvCon+ [18], [19] (Table II) follows the eight top-level invariant categories
report invariant categories but do not provide comprehensive observedbyTrace2Inv[15];thek ≤100cappreserveshuman
taxonomies of smart contract invariants). Hence, external inspectability. The cluster number k corresponds to the min-
metrics like ARI [42], which tells how often the clustering imum and maximum number of clusters. Among admissible
andthegroundtruthagree,requirelabelsthatareunavailable. runs (C1–C3) for a fixed configuration triple, we select one
We therefore resolve to use four robust intrinsic metrics of configuration by priority: first minimize S Dbw; if tied to
the generated clusters jointly to select the best-performing two decimals, maximize Silhouette; if still tied, maximize
configuration of RAVEN without access to ground truths: Coverage;ifstilltied,preferfewerclusters.Thisyieldsasingle
Silhouette, S Dbw, Coverage, and Admissibility. best-per-triple setting that balances cohesion/separation, as-
1) Silhouette [43] (bounded [−1,1], higher is better): For signmentrate,andparsimonyofclustering.Revertstringsused
point i, in require/assert statements (e.g., OpenZeppelin’s Own-
b(i)−a(i) able contract [45]: require(msg.sender==owner,"caller is
Sil(i)= (1)
max{a(i),b(i)} (cid:44)→ not the owner")) recur across many contract libraries and
can dominate clustering by surface form rather than predicate
where a(i) is the mean intra-cluster distance and b(i) the
semantics. We therefore evaluate both predicate-only and
minimum mean distance to any other cluster.
predicate+message views to detect and mitigate template-
2) S Dbw[44],lowerisbetter): Asinglescorethatprefers
driven clustering artifacts during our grid search for the best
clusters in which (i) points inside a cluster sit close together
hyperparameters.
in embedding space (intra-cluster tightness) and (ii) clearly
separated (few points lying between two clusters).
C. Protocol for Manual Analysis (RQ3)
To evaluate the semantic meaningfulness of the invariant
S Dbw=
1(cid:88)k scatter(C i)
+
1 (cid:88) dens(mid(c i,c j)) groups generated by our best configuration found via RQ1
k
i=1
scatter(D) k(k−1)
i̸=j
max{dens(c i),dens(c j)} and RQ2 protocol, we conduct a manual expert review of the
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) generatedclusters.Weconductaqualitativeanalysisinvolving
within-clustertightness between-clusteroverlap
(2) twoauthors.Incaseofaconflictofopinionsbetweenthefirst
where scatter(C i) is the average cosine distance of points twoauthors,thethirdauthor’svotedeterminestheverdict.The
in cluster i to its centroid c i; dens(p) counts points within review process consists of three phases:
a fixed radius r around p; we set r to the mean within- 1) Semantic Labeling: For every cluster generated by the
cluster scatter across all clusters. mid(c i,c j) is the midpoint best configuration, the annotators independently inspect the
on the unit sphere between centroids c i and c j. We compute invariants to identify the common intent of the invariants
thisusingcosinedistancesonL2-normalizedembeddings.For in the cluster (e.g., checking token allowance vs. checking
DBSCAN/HDBSCAN, we exclude noise points and count time constraints). A cluster is deemed meaningful if a clear,
only non-empty clusters in k. Compared to the Silhouette unifying semantic logic applies to the majority (90%) of its
score, which is intuitive but can be optimistic for roughly constituent invariants. The authors then assign a descriptive
spherical partitions, S Dbw further penalizes loose clusters category label to the cluster.
and overlap between neighboring clusters; therefore, using 2) Taxonomy Alignment and Novelty Detection: To deter-
both provides a more balanced judgment. mine if RAVEN discovers defensive patterns overlooked by
3) Coverage: Coverage captures the extent to which a prior work, we map our derived labels against the invariant
clustering algorithm confidently structures the space. Density templates and taxonomies from three state-of-the-art invariant
methods (e.g., DBSCAN/HDBSCAN) can trade coverage for mining and synthesis tools: Trace2Inv [15] (23 templates),
cluster homogeneity by labeling uncertain points (e.g., border InvCon+[18](14templates),andtheformalizedbusinesslogic
pointsbetweenclusters)asnoise,therebydecreasingcoverage. properties from DCR graphs [46]. A cluster is classified as a
#(cid:8) invariantsassigned (cid:9) newcategoryifitssemanticintentdoesnotmaptoanyexisting
Coverage= toanon-noisecluster ×100%. (3) template in these catalogs.
#{unique invariants}
3) ClusterDistinction: Finally,weverifythatthegenerated
4) Admissibility and Best Model Selection: We define a clustersaredistinctfromoneanother.Weanalyzethesemantic
configuration triple admissible if sufficies all the three fol- boundaries between clusters to ensure that separate clusters
lowing criteria: represent non-overlapping logic (e.g., invariants with intents
• C1 (Granularity): 8≤#clusters≤100 (motivated below), “Caller Not Owner” and “Contract Paused” are not merged).
TABLE III: Clustering evaluation results with error messages. TABLE IV: Clustering results without error messages.
Embedding Alg. Sil. S Dbw #C %C Search-MinedParams Embedding Alg. Sil. S Dbw #C %C Search-MinedParams
TF-IDF K-Means 0.55 0.034 99 100.0 n clusters:99 TF-IDF K-Means 0.55 0.078 99 100.0 n clusters:99
TF-IDF DBSCAN 0.88 0.063 17 56.67 eps:0.36,min samples:10 TF-IDF DBSCAN 0.90 0.095 14 51.72 eps:0.36,min samples:10
TF-IDF HDBSCAN 0.76 0.067 11 81.71 min cluster size:13 TF-IDF HDBSCAN 0.80 0.136 10 61.35 min cluster size:17
CodeBERT K-Means 0.52 0.061 99 100.0 n clusters:99 CodeBERT K-Means 0.49 0.049 99 100.0 n clusters:99
CodeBERT DBSCAN 0.83 0.079 18 56.53 eps:0.36,min samples:10 CodeBERT DBSCAN 0.79 0.065 18 55.16 eps:0.36,min samples:11
CodeBERT HDBSCAN 0.59 0.115 11 76.62 min cluster size:12 CodeBERT HDBSCAN 0.73 0.064 13 62.04 min cluster size:12
SmartBERT K-Means 0.57 0.071 99 100.0 n clusters:99 SmartBERT K-Means 0.52 0.054 99 100.0 n clusters:99
SmartBERT DBSCAN 0.84 0.090 16 54.8 eps:0.36,min samples:12 SmartBERT DBSCAN 0.86 0.069 20 54.61 eps:0.36,min samples:11
SmartBERT HDBSCAN 0.65 0.141 16 72.08 min cluster size:10 SmartBERT HDBSCAN 0.85 0.062 12 77.99 min cluster size:10
RAVENBERT K-Means 0.60 0.028 99 100.0 n clusters:99 RAVENBERT K-Means 0.68 0.030 99 100.0 n clusters:99
RAVENBERT DBSCAN 0.89 0.042 18 58.32 eps:0.36,min samples:14 RAVENBERTDBSCAN 0.93 0.043 19 51.86 eps:0.36,min samples:15
RAVENBERT HDBSCAN 0.73 0.058 21 83.77 min cluster size:10 RAVENBERT HDBSCAN 0.76 0.056 23 85.97 min cluster size:10
D. Protocol for Real-World Incident Analysis (RQ4) 4) Optimal Clustering Strategies: Performance analysis
yielded three superior configurations based on combined
To demonstrate that a newly discovered invariant category
S dbw score, silhouette score, and coverage (bold rows in
by RAVEN can act as a practical oracle in detecting a real-
TableIIIandTableIV). RAVENBERT withouterrormessages
world vulnerability, we conduct a case study. This case study
usingDBSCANachievesaSilhouettescoreof0.93,acoverage
is conducted based on the RQ3 results categories. We begin
of 51.86%, and an S dbw score of 0.043. RAVEN with
byscanningincidentreportsinDeFiHackLabs[47]toidentify
messagesusingDBSCANachievesaSilhouettescoreof0.89,
one incident with characteristics suggesting that it could have
a coverage of 58.32%, and an S dbw score of 0.042. Smart-
been prevented if one of our newly discovered invariant cate-
BERT without messages with DBSCAN achieves a Sil. score
gories (as presented in RQ3 results) had been used to analyze
of0.86,acoverageof54.6%,andaS dbwscoreof0.069and
the contract. We use the matching category to construct a
yields the next-best performance after RAVENBERT.
fuzzing oracle for this specific incident. Based on this oracle,
we create a Foundry-based fuzz test that randomly creates RQ1 Answer: Intrinsic Quality Evaluation
transaction sequences targeting the upgrade procedure of the
RAVEN’s best configuration found via our grid search,
identified incident. Our success in detecting the incident’s
is RAVENBERT without error messages using DBSCAN
vulnerability using this fuzz test demonstrates the real-world
algorithmwithSilhouettescore0.93andS Dbwscore0.42.
effectiveness of the discovered category in preventing the
incident.
B. Analysis of RAVEN’s three Best Clustering Configurations
V. RESULTS
Hereweanalyzetheproducedclustersofthethreesuperior
We report clustering results on 20k failed transactions
model configurations of RAVEN.
1) PCA Analysis: Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is
(June2024–March2025),comparingtwoinvariantviews,four
a linear projection that rotates the embedding space to align
embeddings, three algorithms. Sections V-A and V-B present
withaxes(principalcomponents),capturingthemaximalvari-
quantitative and manual analysis of RAVEN. Section V-C
ance.Plottingthefirsttwocomponentsprovidesa2Dsketchof
presents the results of our case study.
the geometry in high dimensions, revealing how tight clusters
are, how far apart they are, and where ambiguous border
A. Clustering Performance
points and noise reside. In our unsupervised setting with no
Running the hyperparameter grid search detailed in Sec- ground truth, PCA serves as a sanity check and interpretation
tion IV results in the best admissible results for the 24 aid that complements intrinsic metrics (Silhouette, S Dbw).
configurations of RAVEN presented in Tables III and IV. Compact and well-separated islands for each cluster in the
1) Silhouette Score Analysis: DBSCAN achieved the high- PCA plot correspond to high Silhouette (high cohesion, high
est silhouette scores (0.79–0.93), with RAVEN reaching 0.93 separation), which in turn makes the clustering semantically
(no messages) and 0.89 (with messages). HDBSCAN ranged valid. As Figure 4a shows, RAVEN’s embedding+DBSCAN
0.59–0.85 (SmartBERT best at 0.85), while K-Means scored with predicate-only view clusters form small, dense islands
0.49–0.68 (CodeBERT worst at 0.49). with clear gaps between them, while a sizeable set is left
2) S dbw Score Analysis: RAVENBERT with DBSCAN as noise. This matches the strong intrinsic quality metric re-
clustering algorithm achieved best S dbw scores (0.042 with sults(Silhouette0.93,S Dbw0.043)atconservativecoverage
messages, 0.043 without), outperforming HDBSCAN (0.056– (≈ 52%, Table IV). This is useful for reliable taxonomy-
0.141) and K-Means (0.028–0.078). Manual inspection re- building tasks (tight, unambiguous semantic groups). Clusters
vealedK-Meansover-dividessemanticgroupsinto99clusters of RAVENBERT+DBSCAN with error messages in Figure 4b
(maxallowed).Therefore,weexcludeitfromfurtheranalysis. visibly stretch more along PC1. Here, coverage rises, but Sil-
3) CoverageAnalysis: DBSCANcovered51.7–58.3%(14– houetteislowercomparedtoitscounterpartwithouterrormes-
20 clusters), with RAVEN achieving highest at 58.3%. HDB- sages. This suggests error messages inject additional variance
SCAN reached 61.3–85.9% (10–23 clusters). (often stylistic/template-like), creating more border cases. If
8
4
0
0 4 8
PCA 1
2
ACP
Noise
5.0
2.5
0.0
0 4 8 12
PCA 1
(a)RAVEN
2
ACP
9.0
Noise
7.5
6.0
4.5
0.0 1.5 3.0
PCA 1
(b)RAVEN+msgs.
2
ACP
Noise
(c)SmartBERT
Fig. 4: PCA Analysis for the clusters generated by the best-performing configurations of RAVEN.
messages added crisp semantic distinctions, we would expect graphs [15], [18], [46]. Below we list these categories:
higher Silhouette. Lastly, in SmartBERT+HDBSCAN with ✓Caller-providedslippagethresholds(relational)(Cluster2):
predicate-only view in Figure 4c, more points are absorbed guardslikeamountOut >= amountOutMinthatrelatetworun-
into clusters leading to higher coverage (≈78%) but the PCA time variables as slippage guard. Trace2Inv’s [15] “oracle
view shows elongated clusters, softer boundaries, and more slippage” uses constant bounds; InvCon+ and DCR graphs
possibleoverlapscomparedtotheprevioustwoconfigurations, formalizationsdonotcontainarelatablecategory[18],[48].
consistent with its intrinsic metric results (Silhouette 0.85). ✓Feature toggles (Clusters 6): contract-wide enable/disable
Thesesuggestthatcompact,well-separatedclustersallowusto toggles such as tradeEnabled. These are not covered by
make strong, defensible claims about what each cluster repre- Trace2Inv’s[15]AccessControl(EOA/owner/manager)nor
sents and align with RAVEN’s goal of discovering meaningful byInvCon+’s[18],anddonotmatchthe“pausable”pattern
semantic categories, rather than covering all possible cases formalizations [46].
(i.e., the cluster’s semantic confidence over higher coverage). ✓Replay prevention (Cluster 7): one-time/consume-once
Furthermore,theaddedvarianceintroducedbythemessagesin checks (e.g., !usedClaims[leaf]) that forbid re-use of
RAVENBERT embedding and DBSCAN configuration means claims/mints; no counterpart in prior catalogs [15], [17],
they boost coverage but slightly degrade cluster cohesion [18], [48].
by incorporating lexical information. This allows us to con- ✓Proof/signature verification (Cluster 9): Merkle and signa-
clude that the triple (RAVENBERT embedding, DBSCAN, ture validation(MerkleProof.verify) absentin prior works.
predicate-only view) is the best configuration. Next, we con- ✓Counters/nonces (Cluster 14): explicit sequence enforce-
duct a manual expert analysis of all of the generated clusters ment which is not present in prior works.
of this configuration (Section V-B2). ✓Allow/ban/bot/whitelist gates (Cluster 12): list-membership
gating (e.g., !isBlacklisted[msg.sender]), conceptually
RQ2 Answer: Coverage–Quality Trade-off distinct from owner/manager checks in the prior works.
Combined, these newly discovered clusters account for 3708
We observe a clear trade-off between coverage and quality.
transactions reversions in our test set, representing 30.33%
RAVEN yields the highest quality at 52–58% coverage
of the test set transactions that were reverted by an invariant
while some configurations raise the coverage to 72–86%
(3708/12222).
with lower cluster quality (grouping semantically unrelated
invariants). Based on the trade-off, the configuration triple
RQ3 Answer: Meaningfulness of Mined Patterns
(RAVEN’s own model, DBSCAN clustering algorithm, and
predicate-only invariant views) is selected as the best way Expert analysis of the generated invariants by RAVEN’s
to semantically cluster invariants. Our results show that best configuration reveals: 1) consistency and overlap of
including the failure message increases coverage (52% → a portion of the resulting clusters with previous invariant
58%) at the expense of less reliable semantic clustering. taxonomies and catalogs [18], [48], [49] and 2) identifying
six meaningful invariant categories (≈ 30% of invariant-
2) ManualReviewoftheGeneratedClusters: Wemanually based reverted transactions in test set) previously ignored.
Furthermore, expert analyses conclude that all generated
inspected all clusters produced by the best configuration
clusters are meaningful and distinct from one another.
(RAVENBERT,DBSCAN,predicate-onlyview),andassigned
semantic labels (see Table V). Our review confirms that most
C. Analysis of a Real-World Incident
clusters fall into well-known families (e.g., Access Control,
Data/Data-Flow, Temporal/Time). It also reveals six invari- To demonstrate that a newly discovered invariant category
ant categories that are absent from prior invariant mining in RAVEN can act as a practical oracle to prevent a real-
tools’ templates—specifically, from Trace2Inv’s enumerated world exploit, we use Nomad Bridge incident (August 2022),
23-template catalog, InvCon+’s 14 invariant templates, and a high-profile incident where a faulty upgrade broke a proof-
the 15 formalized business logic properties modeled by DCR verification check and enabled unauthorized message process-
TABLE V: Cluster labels (RAVENBERT embedding, DBSCAN, predicate-only) with one representative invariant per cluster. Rows 2, 6, 7,
9, 12, and 14 are newly discovered categories that are absent from the literature.
# Assignedcategory Example(s)fromthecluster Description #ofTXs
1 Walletbudgetguards balanceof(from)>= amount Ensuresufficientbalance,allowance,andreservesbeforeops. (7.40%)515
2 Slip-safethresholds amountout >= amountoutmin Slippageguardsensurereceivedamountsmeetminthresholds. (44.78%)3116
3 Tax/feebypassprivileges isexcludedfromfees[from]||isexcludedfromfees[to] OR-basedexemptionsfromtransactionfeesandtaxes. (7.86%)547
4 Timeconstraints block.timestamp > deadline Deadlineandexpirationvalidationsusingblocktimestamps. (6.47%)450
5 Non-zerosanity reservein > 0 && reserveout > 0 - (4.51%)314
6 Featuretoggles tradeenabled,!launched,!data.tradingenabled Positivebooleanflagsrequiringenabled/activefeatures. (4.28%)298
7 Replayprevention !usedclaims[claimleaf] Ensuringactionsarenotrepeated(claims,mints,submissions). (0.62%)43
8 Not-paused/not-stopped !paused Invertedbooleanchecksforpaused/disabled/inactivestates. (2.27%)158
9 Proof/signatureverification !merkleproof.verify(proof, merkleroot, leaf) Merkleproof,signature,andhashverificationoperations. (0.75%)52
10 Senderbudgetguards balances[msg.sender] >= _amount Messagesender’sbalanceandspendingapprovalchecks. (0.80%)56
11 Paymentsanitychecks _amount * price == msg.value - (0.92%)64
12 (Allow/ban/bot/white)-list !isblacklisted[msg.sender] Include/excludelistscontrollingwhocaninteract. (1.24%)86
13 Cooldowns/RateLimits cooldown[to] < block.timestamp Block-/time-basedthrottlingbetweenoperations. (0.83%)58
14 Counters/nonces allowed.nonce != nonce Noncetrackingandstatesequencenumberenforcement. (1.62%)113
15 Mint/supplycaps totalsupply()+ mint_amount <= max_supply Maximumsupplyceilingenforcementfortokencreation. (0.60%)42
16 Accesscontrol owner()== _msgsender() Themostbasicformsofaccesscontrol. (1.18%)82
17 Addresssanity recipient != address(0) Non-zeroaddresses,notthiscontract,validpairendpoints. (1.06%)74
18 Low-levelinputvalidations success&&(data.length==0||abi.decode(data,(bool))) Multi-clauselow-levelinputvalidationlogic. (3.48%)242
19 Budgetfloors balance >= amount Straightforwardbudgetfloors. (9.31%)648
Totalclusteredtransactions 6958
ing leading to asset theft (reported at ≈ $190M at the time steps.Inourconfiguration,wedonotaddanyNomad-specific
of attack). The characteristics of this incident match with guidance. Instead, UPGRADE takes its parameters directly
proof/signatureverification(category9)fromRQ3results.We as fuzz inputs (a bytes32 root and a uint64 timestamp-
usethisinvariantcategorytodetectthevulnerabilityofNomad like value), while PROCESS takes an arbitrary fuzzed byte-
incident [50], [51]. Cluster 9 in RQ3 includes both (i) direct string as the message. To make this baseline practical, we
cryptographiccheckssuchasMerkleProof.verify(...)and rely only on Foundry’s standard dictionary bias for fuzzing,
(ii) derived proof-state checks where successful verification is which biases generated inputs toward interesting boundary
recorded into contract state (e.g., proven[leaf] or a stored values such as 0x0 and small integers. The fuzzer repeatedly
root), and later enforced by a guard at the privileged entry- generates random call sequences to these actions; for each
point. Nomad follows the second form: process(m) checks a call it also generates random arguments and a random sender.
stored proof marker (a mapping value) , and the upgrade bug After each step (or at the end of the sequence, depending on
made the default mapping value (0x0) appear acceptable. We configuration), Foundry evaluates the invariants and shrinks
distill a security invariant from this: failing sequences. Cluster 9 translates to a fuzzing oracle
where a message must not be processed unless it has been
∀m. PROCESS(m) ⇒ PROVED(m)
proven under a trusted root/signature. We enforce this ora-
i.e., across upgrades/initialization, a message must not be
cle by instrumenting the handler’s PROCESS action. Before
processed unless it has been proved under a trusted root.
calling process(message), we compute the message hash and
query the contract’s proof state. If the message is “unproved”
Nomad’s cross-chain message acceptance follows the pat-
(mapping default 0x0), but process nevertheless succeeds, we
tern of (i) a message is proved by verifying inclusion under
setaghostflagunprovenProcessSucceeded = true.Theinvari-
a trusted Merkle root, then (ii) the message is processed to
ant invariant_unprovenMessagesNeverProcess_noHints() as-
release/mint assets. The exploit root cause was an upgrade-
timemisconfigurationthatmadethe“unproved”stateindistin-
sertsthatthisflagneverbecomestrue.Thisconverts RAVEN’s
proof-verification category into a concrete fuzzing oracle.
guishable from the “proved” state. This resulted in a routine
upgrade marked a bytes32(0) root as trusted/committed, and Running the fuzzer. After running our fuzzer, it identifies
because Solidity mappings default to zero values, messages a violation of invariants, reports the failing call sequence, and
that were never proved could appear as if they were proved applies its shrinking procedure to minimize it, obtaining the
under the zero root. This enabled the attacker to call the smallest call sequence corresponding to this counterexample.
privileged function process(message) without a valid proof In our experiment, shrinking consistently yields a two-step
stepandstillsucceed,allowingforthemassdrainingofassets. counterexample that mirrors the real incident’s causal struc-
Building a Foundry fuzzer. We implement an upgrade- ture:
aware fuzzer using Foundry’s stateful invariant testing. We
wrap the Nomad’s message-processing contract in a Foundry UPGRADE(root=0x0, confirmAt=1) ; PROCESS(m)
handler that exposes three actions: UPGRADE, PROVE,
and PROCESS. During an invariant-based fuzzing campaign, where m is a fuzz-generated message that was never proved.
Foundry repeatedly generates randomized sequences of calls Foundry’s trace output provides evidence for the oracle vio-
to these actions, and checks the invariant after the sequence lation: immediately before process, the contract reports the
message’s proof state as 0x0 (unproved), yet process returns reveals these four invariants are misplaced into another clus-
successfully instead of reverting. ter4 , and for the other high-performing RAVEN configu-
ration, which uses predicate+messages view, one of these
RQ4 Answer: Effectiveness in Vulnerability Detection
invariants is mis-clustered and the others are not clustered.
Our case study demonstrates RAVEN’s newly discovered Only K-Means configurations successfully generate micro-
proof/signature verification category can be leveraged as a clusters. However, K-Means generates too many clusters
concrete, reusable security oracle for a fuzzer to detect the and breaks down semantically relevant clusters into multiple
logical vulnerability of the Nomad Bridge incident. groups making it unsuitable. Furthermore, some invariants
that conduct very specialized checks, such as uniswapv2pair
VI. DISCUSSION (cid:44)→ != from && uniswapv2pair != to,areunder-representedin
This section discusses the results, their implications, and the dataset, and are semantically different from any other
addresses limitations and threats to validity. cluster; thus, they remain unclustered. The same holds for
protocol-specific business logic invariants such as key ==
A. Impact of Fine-Tuned Embeddings on Clustering (cid:44)→ uint256(uint160(msg.sender))* (epoch()**2)+ 1.
RAVENBERT outperforms both general-purpose Code- Multi-clause invariants. We investigated whether the logical
BERTanddomain-specificSmartBERT-v2viainvariant-based complexity of invariants affects clusterability by examining
fine-tuning beyond contract-level understanding. This is con- multi-clause invariants—those with multiple sub-predicates
sistentwiththeliterature’sfocusondomain-specificfine-tuned combined via Boolean operators (&&, ||) or multiple com-
BERT models for security [52]. Furthermore, this shows task- parison operators (>=, <, !=). Such invariants encode multi-
specific fine-tuning is effective even with small but high- ple independent intents, potentially producing less coherent
quality datasets (1932 unique invariants), suggesting invari- embeddings. However, multi-clause forms appear equally in
ant analysis should prioritize specialized training over sole both groups: 53 among unclustered invariants and 76 among
reliance on pre-trained models [53]. clustered ones (17.43% vs 17.08%). Hence, this structural
property does not correlate with the low coverage of our best-
B. The Predicate-Only Ablation
performing configuration.
Predicate-only views outperform predicate+message, which
indicates error messages introduce lexical noise via common D. Why Six Categories Were Previously Unnoticed
message templates, creating spurious similarity across seman-
We attribute the discovery of the six new categories to two
tically distinct checks while separating semantically identical
contributingfactors.(1)Template-drivenblindness:Priortools
checks with different messages. Messages increase coverage
usepredefinedinvarianttemplatesandhand-craftedcategories
6% (52% → 58%) by capturing edge cases but degrade clus-
of invariants that excel at finding anticipated patterns but
ter homogeneity. For taxonomy construction, which requires
cannot discover out-of-distribution defenses. Our data-driven
semantic coherence, predicate-only views are preferable.
approachmakesnoaprioriassumptions,discoveringstructure
C. Reasons for the Coverage-Quality Trade-off from observed behavior. (2) Exploit-centric bias: security
research emphasizes offensive analysis [10], [13], biasing
The stark difference between DBSCAN’s conservative as-
templates toward vulnerabilities in exploited contracts; while
signment (52-58% coverage, Silhouette 0.93) and HDB-
prevented attacks leave only silent reverted transactions.
SCAN’s inclusive approach (72-86% coverage, Silhouette
0.73-0.85) reflects the precision-recall tension in cluster as-
E. Open Questions
signment. DBSCAN’s noise labeling acts as a semantic confi-
dence threshold where border points between clusters remain Our work opens several research directions: (1) Scaling
unassigned rather than unreliably clustered. This conserva- to Full Transaction History. The 20k sample analyzed here
tiveness is appropriate for RAVEN’s goal. When claiming a represents0.3%ofthe6.31Mfailuresinour9-monthwindow.
cluster represents, e.g., “replay prevention checks,” we need Scaling RAVEN to the full corpus—and extending back to
high confidence that the majority of members share that Ethereum’s genesis block—would reveal: (a) temporal evo-
intent.Manualanalysisrevealsthatthe48%classifiedasnoise lution of defenses (when did slippage guards emerge?), (b)
also show patterns of (1) micro clusters or (2) multi-clause protocol-specific patterns (do DeFi protocols share defensive
invariants detailed below. characteristics?), and (c) what rare but important checks exist
Micro clusters. Manual review reveals multiple micro- inthenoise?(2)Cross-ChainComparativeAnalysis.Applying
clusters within the unclustered invariants of our best con- RAVEN to other blockchain networks (e.g., Solana) would
figuration. For instance, tx.gasprice > amount, tx.gasprice test whether defensive patterns are EVM-universal or chain-
(cid:44)→ > _gas, tx.gasprice > nefwhitelist, and tx.gasprice > specific. Solana’s account model and Rust-based constraints
(cid:44)→ _rfee[from] && _rfee[from] != 0 could be clustered to- may produce different invariant families. Such a comparison
gether, but our best configuration’s conservativeness leaves
them as noise. Review of the results for the configuration
4https://github.com/mojtaba-eshghie/Raven/blob/main/clustering/
(SmartBERT embedding, HDBSCAN, predicate-only view) experiments/without/hdbscan SmartBert.txt
can inform cross-chain security practices. (3) Hybrid Neuro- labels. VeriSmart [20] statically synthesizes logical invariants
Symbolic Approaches. While RAVEN uses neural embed- with SMT to prove or refute safety properties of smart
dings for scalability, pairwise symbolic comparison (e.g., via contracts. Both FLAMES [6] and VeriSmart [20] produce
SINDI [54]) could validate intra-cluster semantic consistency. invariants on source or IR, and do not characterize which
Ahybridapproachthatcombinesneuralclusteringfordiscov- defensive checks actually block real-world attacks.
ery and symbolic validation of the discovered invariant. This Neuralandsymboliccoderepresentations.General-purpose
could reduce false positives in clustering membership. encoders, such as CodeBERT [31], provide contextual em-
beddings for code, whereas domain-specific models like
F. Threats to Validity
SmartBERT-v2 [29] are tailored to Solidity sources. Sol-
1) Extraction Pipeline Accuracy: Our invariant extraction BERT [26] uses contrastive learning with AST views, and
relies on Tenderly’s dynamic analysis API, which has a 3% SmartEmbed [30] fuses CFG features to detect clone-related
failurerateanda13.8%sourcecodemismatchwithEtherscan bugs. SINDI [54] compares the semantic strength of pairs of
(when the tool does not yield an invariant but the source code invariantssymbolically.Theseenablesemanticembeddingbut
is present on Etherscan). Nevertheless, manual validation of either operate at contract granularity, rely on templates, or
1000 transactions confirmed 100% accuracy for the success- addresspairwiserelationsratherthanglobalstructure. RAVEN
fully extracted invariants. differs by fine-tuning an invariant-level encoder (Solidity
2) BiasTowardsVerifiedContracts: The23.3%“Nosource syntax) on failed transaction invariants and applying semantic
code found” exclusion creates survivor bias toward profes- clustering to reveal semantic invariant groups without labels.
sionally developed and verified contracts. While there is no Empirical studies of failed transactions.Large-scalestudies
definitive answer for the proportion of unverified contracts report why transactions fail and where gas is spent (e.g., out-
being malware, unverified source code is typically used as a of-gas, bot-driven spam) [11], [22]. These studies quantify
red flag for malware detection [55]. failure modes but typically record error strings or high-level
reasons,anddonotextractandaggregatethepreciseinvariants
VII. RELATEDWORKS
responsible for the reverts, nor do they build an invariant
The conceptual framework of invariants was established taxonomy.RAVENclosesthisgapbyextractinginvariantpred-
by Floyd [56]. He introduced a method for reasoning about icatesresponsibleforthetransactionfailures,andsemantically
a program’s correctness by associating assertions, known clustering them. RAVEN enables a future large-scale study of
as invariants, with specific points in a control flow graph, all failed transactions (e.g., on Ethereum) to determine the
such as condition branches or loops. This foundation was most failure-inducing and potentially attack-reverting invari-
extended by Hoare Logic [57], which laid the groundwork ants effective in severe recent DeFi incidents [10].
for formal program verification by treating such assertions as
conditionsthatmustremaintruethroughoutexecution.Related
VIII. CONCLUSION
research on invariants and semantic clustering falls into three This work presents RAVEN, a tool to analyze and seman-
threads: dynamic mining and static synthesis of invariants, tically cluster Ethereum’s on-chain failed (reverted) transac-
code representations, and empirical studies on blockchain’s tions.WereframerevertedexecutionsonEthereumasasignal
failed transactions. We position RAVEN against each of these. forunderstandingwhatdefensesimplementedbythecontracts
Smart contract invariant mining and synthesis. actually work on the chain. More specifically, the transac-
Trace2Inv [15] infers invariants from transaction traces tionsthatwererevertedbyrequire/assert/if...revert/throw
using templates and reports coarse categories (e.g., access statements (invariants) in the smart contract on Ethereum are
control, data flow, time lock). InvCon [17] and its successor, the input to RAVEN. RAVEN extracts the precise predicates
InvCon+ [18], target token-centric invariants (ERC-20 and that trigger reverts, embeds them with a contrastively fine-
ERC-721) via specification templates (i.e., catalogs of tuned BERT-based model, and semantically clusters them.
Solidity invariants) and transaction history. SmartOracle [16] On a representative sample of 20k failed transaction failures
also mines pattern-based properties from transaction history. (mapping to 727 unique invariants that revert them), RAVEN
Eshghie et al. [46], [48] offer a formalization of 15 business yieldswell-separatedclusters.Amanualexpertanalysisofthe
logic properties that encode many well-known smart contract generated 19 clusters confirms coherent defensive invariants
invariants and are used for tasks such as monitoring and alignedwithpriortaxonomiesandidentifiessixpreviouslyun-
PoC exploit synthesis [3], [5]. InvSol [19] transcompiles the reported categories (e.g., replay prevention, signature/Merkle
SoliditycontracttoJava+JML,usesatestcraftertogenerate verification,allow/ban/botlists,etc.),indicatingsemanticanal-
many test cases via which it infers Daikon-style invariants. ysisrevertedexecutionsonblockchainrevealsdefensepatterns
All mentioned works use invariant templates that do not missed by the literature. Our case study on a real-world
benefit from the deployed successful defenses on Ethereum. incident further validates the utility of these invariants as
Instead, they rely on hand-crafted template invariants that security analysis oracles. We envision RAVEN as a tool for
are not comprehensive and may not reflect the real-world researchers and security practitioners to map the ecosystem’s
defenses. FLAMES [6] generates invariants in the form of working defensive surface, informing invariant catalogs of
pre-/post-conditions to harden contracts without vulnerability invariant synthesizers/miners and analysis tools.
REFERENCES [21] W.Ma,D.Wu,Y.Sun,T.Wang,S.Liu,J.Zhang,Y.Xue,andY.Liu,
Combining Fine-Tuning and LLM-Based Agents for Intuitive Smart
ContractAuditingwithJustifications. IEEEPress,2025,p.1742–1754.
[1] C.Shou,S.Tan,andK.Sen,“Ityfuzz:Snapshot-basedfuzzerforsmart
[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00027
contract,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International
[22] L.Liu,L.Wei,W.Zhang,M.Wen,Y.Liu,andS.-C.Cheung,“Charac-
SymposiumonSoftwareTestingandAnalysis,ser.ISSTA2023. New
terizingtransaction-revertingstatementsinethereumsmartcontracts,”in
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, p.
202136thIEEE/ACMInternationalConferenceonAutomatedSoftware
322–333.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3597926.3598059
Engineering(ASE),2021,pp.630–641.
[2] H. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Li, S.-W. Lin, C. Artho, L. Ma, and Y. Liu, [23] A. Petukhova, J. P. Matos-Carvalho, and N. Fachada, “Text clustering
“Oracle-supported dynamic exploit generation for smart contracts,” with large language model embeddings,” International Journal of
IEEETransactionsonDependableandSecureComputing,vol.19,no.3, Cognitive Computing in Engineering, vol. 6, p. 100–108, Dec. 2025.
pp.1795–1809,2022. [Online].Available:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcce.2024.11.004
[3] M. Eshghie and C. Artho, “Oracle-guided vulnerability diversity and [24] J.Devlin,M.-W.Chang,K.Lee,andK.Toutanova,“Bert:Pre-training
exploit synthesis of smart contracts using llms,” in Proceedings of ofdeepbidirectionaltransformersforlanguageunderstanding,”inPro-
the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software ceedingsofthe2019conferenceoftheNorthAmericanchapterofthe
Engineering,2024,pp.2240–2248. associationforcomputationallinguistics:humanlanguagetechnologies,
[4] M.Eshghie,C.Artho,andD.Gurov,“DynamicVulnerabilityDetection volume1(longandshortpapers),2019,pp.4171–4186.
on Smart Contracts Using Machine Learning,” in Evaluation and [25] R.XuandD.Wunsch,“Surveyofclusteringalgorithms,”IEEETrans-
AssessmentinSoftwareEngineering,ser.EASE2021. NewYork,NY, actionsonNeuralNetworks,vol.16,no.3,pp.645–678,2005.
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Jun. 2021, pp. 305–312. [26] Z. Tian, Y. Teng, X. Ke, Y. Chen, and L. Chen, “Solbert:
[Online].Available:https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3463274.3463348 Advancing solidity smart contract similarity analysis via self-
[5] M. Eshghie, C. Artho, H. Stammler, W. Ahrendt, T. Hildebrandt, and supervised pre-training and contrastive fine-tuning,” Information and
G. Schneider, “Highguard: Cross-chain business logic monitoring of Software Technology, vol. 184, p. 107766, 2025. [Online]. Available:
smart contracts,” in Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950584925001053
ConferenceonAutomatedSoftwareEngineering,2024,pp.2378–2381. [27] C. Ragkhitwetsagul and J. Krinke, “Siamese: scalable and incremental
[6] M. Eshghie, G. Morello, M. Lauretano, A. Bartel, and M. Monperrus, code clone search via multiple code representations,” Empirical
“Flames: Fine-tuning llms to synthesize invariants for smart contract Software Engineering, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 2236–2284, Aug. 2019.
security,”2025.[Online].Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.21401 [Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-019-09697-7
[7] “Ethereum Yellow Paper,” Dec. 2022. [Online]. Available: https: [28] A.Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N.Gomez,
//github.com/ethereum/yellowpaper L.Kaiser,andI.Polosukhin,“Attentionisallyouneed,”inProceedings
[8] S.Team,“Soliditydocumentation,”https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8. ofthe31stInternationalConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessing
30/,accessed:2025-06-12. Systems,ser.NIPS’17. RedHook,NY,USA:CurranAssociatesInc.,
[9] G.Morello,M.Eshghie,S.Bobadilla,andM.Monperrus,“Disl:Fueling 2017,p.6000–6010.
Research with A Large Dataset of Solidity Smart Contracts,” https:// [29] Y. Huang, J. Li, S. Fang, Y. Li, P. Yang, and B. Hu, “Smart contract
arxiv.org/abs/2403.16861,2024. intent detection with pre-trained programming language model,” 2025.
[10] H. Rezaei, M. Eshghie, K. Anderesson, and F. Palmieri, “Sok: [Online].Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.20086
Root cause of $1 billion loss in smart contract real-world attacks [30] Z. Gao, V. Jayasundara, L. Jiang, X. Xia, D. Lo, and J. Grundy,
via a systematic literature review of vulnerabilities,” 2025. [Online]. “Smartembed: A tool for clone and bug detection in smart contracts
Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.20175 through structural code embedding,” in 2019 IEEE International Con-
ference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME), 2019, pp.
[11] X. Zheng, Z. Wan, D. Lo, D. Xie, and X. Yang, “Why does my
394–397.
transaction fail? a first look at failed transactions on the solana
blockchain,” Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., vol. 2, no. ISSTA, Jun. 2025. [31] Z. Feng, D. Guo, D. Tang, N. Duan, X. Feng, M. Gong,
[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3728943 L. Shou, B. Qin, T. Liu, D. Jiang, and M. Zhou, “CodeBERT:
A pre-trained model for programming and natural languages,” in
[12] “TotalfailedtransactionstocontractsonEthereum.”[Online].Available:
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
https://www.dune.com/queries/6115433
2020, T. Cohn, Y. He, and Y. Liu, Eds. Online: Association
[13] L. Zhou, X. Xiong, J. Ernstberger, S. Chaliasos, Z. Wang, Y. Wang,
for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2020, pp. 1536–1547. [Online].
K.Qin,R.Wattenhofer,D.Song,andA.Gervais,“SoK:Decentralized
Available:https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.139/
Finance (DeFi) Attacks,” in 2023 IEEE Symposium on Security and
[32] P. Jain, A. Jain, T. Zhang, P. Abbeel, J. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica,
Privacy(SP),May2023,pp.2444–2461.
“Contrastive code representation learning,” in Proceedings of the
[14] A. Gervais and L. Zhou, “Ai agent smart contract exploit generation,”
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
2025.[Online].Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05558
Processing, M.-F. Moens, X. Huang, L. Specia, and S. W.-t. Yih,
[15] Z. Chen, Y. Liu, S. M. Beillahi, Y. Li, and F. Long, “Demystifying
Eds. Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic: Association
invariant effectiveness for securing smart contracts,” Proc. ACM
for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2021, pp. 5954–5971. [Online].
Softw. Eng., vol. 1, no. FSE, Jul. 2024. [Online]. Available:
Available:https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.482/
https://doi.org/10.1145/3660786
[33] B. Probierz, J. Kozak, and A. Hrabia, “Clustering of scientific
[16] J.Su,J.Chen,Z.Fang,X.Lin,Y.Tang,andZ.Zheng,“Smartoracle: articles using natural language processing,” Procedia Computer
Generating smart contract oracle via fine-grained invariant detection,” Science, vol. 207, pp. 3449–3458, 2022, knowledge-Based and
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 947– Intelligent Information & Engineering Systems: Proceedings of
959,2025. the 26th International Conference KES2022. [Online]. Available:
[17] Y. Liu and Y. Li, “Invcon: A dynamic invariant detector for ethereum https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050922012947
smart contracts,” in Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International [34] K. P. Sinaga and M.-S. Yang, “Unsupervised k-means clustering algo-
Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ser. ASE ’22. New rithm,”IEEEAccess,vol.8,pp.80716–80727,2020.
York,NY,USA:AssociationforComputingMachinery,2023.[Online]. [35] D. Deng, “Dbscan clustering algorithm based on density,” in 2020
Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3551349.3559539 7th International Forum on Electrical Engineering and Automation
[18] Y. Liu, C. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Automated invariant generation for (IFEEA),2020,pp.949–953.
soliditysmartcontracts,”IEEETransactionsonDependableandSecure [36] X. Ran, Y. Xi, Y. Lu, and et al., “Comprehensive survey on
Computing,pp.1–17,2025. hierarchical clustering algorithms and the recent developments,”
[19] K.Kaushik,R.Halder,andS.Mondal,“Strengtheningsolidityinvariant Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 56, pp. 8219–8264, 2023. [Online].
generation: From post- to pre-deployment,” 2024. [Online]. Available: Available:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-022-10366-3
https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.01804 [37] C. Malzer and M. Baum, “A hybrid approach to hierarchical density-
[20] S.So,M.Lee,J.Park,H.Lee,andH.Oh,“Verismart:Ahighlyprecise based cluster selection,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on
safetyverifierforethereumsmartcontracts,”in2020IEEESymposium MultisensorFusionandIntegrationforIntelligentSystems(MFI),2020,
onSecurityandPrivacy(SP),2020,pp.1678–1694. pp.223–228.
[38] Statistics How To, “Sample size in statistics (how to
find it): Excel, cochran’s formula, general tips,” accessed:
2025-05-29. [Online]. Available: https://www.statisticshowto.com/
probability-and-statistics/find-sample-size/#Cochran
[39] J. Barlett, J. Kotrlik, and C. Higgins, “Organizational research: De-
termining appropriate sample size in survey research,” Information
Technology,Learning,andPerformanceJournal,vol.19,012001.
[40] S. Team. (2023) Breaking changes in solidity. Accessed:
2025-04-28. [Online]. Available: https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/
080-breaking-changes.html
[41] Tenderly, “Tenderly api documentation,” n.d., accessed: 2025-04-02.
[Online].Available:https://docs.tenderly.co/reference/api
[42] S. Zhang and H.-S. Wong, “Arimp: A generalized adjusted rand index
forclusterensembles,”in201020thInternationalConferenceonPattern
Recognition,2010,pp.778–781.
[43] P. Rousseeuw, “Rousseeuw, p.j.: Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the
interpretationandvalidationofclusteranalysis.comput.appl.math.20,
53-65,” Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, vol. 20,
pp.53–65,111987.
[44] Y.Liu,Z.Li,H.Xiong,X.Gao,andJ.Wu,“Understandingofinternal
clusteringvalidationmeasures,”in2010IEEEInternationalConference
onDataMining,2010,pp.911–916.
[45] OpenZeppelin, “Access – OpenZeppelin Contracts 2.x API,”
Online, 2025, accessed: 2025-06-13. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/2.x/api/access
[46] M. Eshghie, W. Ahrendt, C. Artho, T. Troels Hildebrandt, and
G. Schneider, “Formalizing smart contract design patterns with dcr
graphs,” qC 20250505. [Online]. Available: https://www.diva-portal.
org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A1956132&dswid=293
[47] SunWeb3Sec,“DeFiHacksReproduce-Foundry,”accessed:2025-10-
08.[Online].Available:https://github.com/SunWeb3Sec/DeFiHackLabs
[48] M.Eshghie,W.Ahrendt,C.Artho,T.T.Hildebrandt,andG.Schneider,
“Capturing Smart Contract Design with DCR Graphs,” in Software
Engineering and Formal Methods, C. Ferreira and T. A. C. Willemse,
Eds. Cham:SpringerNatureSwitzerland,2023,pp.106–125.
[49] B.Mariano,Y.Chen,Y.Feng,S.K.Lahiri,andI.Dillig,“Demystifying
loops in smart contracts,” in 2020 35th IEEE/ACM International Con-
ferenceonAutomatedSoftwareEngineering(ASE),2020,pp.262–274.
[50] “Decentralized Robbery: Dissecting the Nomad Bridge Hack and Fol-
lowingtheMoney|Mandiant.”[Online].Available:https://cloud.google.
com/blog/topics/threat-intelligence/dissecting-nomad-bridge-hack
[51] Immunefi, “Hack Analysis: Nomad Bridge, August 2022,”
Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/immunefi/
hack-analysis-nomad-bridge-august-2022-5aa63d53814a
[52] E.Aghaei,X.Niu,W.Shadid,andE.Al-Shaer,“Securebert:Adomain-
specific language model for cybersecurity,” in Security and Privacy in
CommunicationNetworks,F.Li,K.Liang,Z.Lin,andS.K.Katsikas,
Eds. Cham:SpringerNatureSwitzerland,2023,pp.39–56.
[53] C. Zhou, P. Liu, P. Xu, S. Iyer, J. Sun, Y. Mao, X. Ma, A. Efrat,
P. Yu, L. Yu, S. Zhang, G. Ghosh, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and
O.Levy,“Lima:lessismoreforalignment,”inProceedingsofthe37th
InternationalConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,ser.
NIPS’23. RedHook,NY,USA:CurranAssociatesInc.,2023.
[54] M. Eshghie, “Sindi: Semantic invariant differencing for solidity
smart contracts,” accessed: 2025-10-02. [Online]. Available: https:
//github.com/mojtaba-eshghie/Sindi
[55] D. Sun, W. Ma, L. Nie, and Y. Liu, “Sok: A taxonomic analysis
of defi rug pulls: Types, dataset, and tool assessment,” Proc. ACM
Softw. Eng., vol. 2, no. ISSTA, Jun. 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3728900
[56] R. W. Floyd, “Assigning meanings to programs,” in Program
Verification, ser. Studies in Cognitive Systems, T. R. Colburn, J. H.
Fetzer,andT.L.Rankin,Eds. Dordrecht:Springer,1993,vol.14,pp.
19–32.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-1793-7
4
[57] C. A. R. Hoare, “An axiomatic basis for computer programming,”
Commun. ACM, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 576–580, Oct. 1969. [Online].
Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/363235.363259