Irony Detection in Urdu Text: A Comparative
Study Using Machine Learning Models and
Large Language Models
[1] Fiaz Ahmad, [2] Nisar Hussain, [2] Amna Qasim, [2] Momina Hafeez, Muhammad Usman [2] Grigori
Sidorov, [2] Alexander Gelbukh
[1] The University of Central Punjab (UCP), Punjab, Pakistan,
[2] Instituto Politécnico Nacional (IPN), Centro de Investigación en Computación (CIC), Mexico,
fiaz.ahmad6917@gmail.com, nhussain2022@cic.ipn.mx, amnaq2023@cic.ipn.mx,
mhafeez2025@cic.ipn.mx, usmancic21@gmail.com, sidorov@cic.ipn.mx, gelbukh@cic.ipn.mx
Abstract— Ironic identification is a difficult issue in the context of NLP, particularly when we switch language with different
syntactic and cultural differences. Here we aim to detect irony by translating the Ironic Corpus available for English language into
the Urdu language. We next utilize ten states of the art machine learning algorithms with GloVe and Word2Vec embeddings to
compare with classical methods. We also fine-tune more sophisticated transformer-based models viz., BERT, RoBERTa, LLaMA 2
(7B), LLaMA 3 (8B) and Mistral, to see the performance of large-scale models in detecting irony. On machine learning models,
Gradient Boosting had the best performance with an F1-Score of 89.18%. Among the top-performing LLMs, LLaMA 3 (8B) achieved
the highest performance, reaching an impressive F1-Score of 94.61%. This study confirms that integrating transliteration engines
with state-of-the-art NLP models enables robust irony detection in Urdu, a historically low-resource language.
Index Terms— Irony Detection, Natural Language Processing (NLP), Deep Learning, Sentiment Analysis, Twitter Data.
capabilities of irony detectors across various domains and
languages [9].
I. INTRODUCTION Nevertheless, there have been very few efforts toward irony
Irony detection is widely studied in the field of Natural detection in Urdu. The absence of a publicly available Urdu
Language Processing (NLP) as it greatly affects the irony dataset, combined with the unique complexity of Urdu
performance of sentiment analysis, content moderation and syntax and cultural humor, highlights the need for dedicated
opinion mining systems. Unlike sentiment classification, investigation. Filling in these gaps, we translate the widely
which is relatively straightforward, irony detection is a more used Ironic Corpus from English into Urdu and annotate it
complex task that places greater emphasis on context, shifts in with the original annotations and accounting for linguistic
sentiment, and underlying meanings that are not always nuances. This paper provides an extensive examination across
immediately apparent [1, 2]. Studies have tried to consider ten machine learning models and several large language
different features (linguistic, syntactic, and affective) in the models (LLMs), e.g., BERT, RoBERTa, LLaMA 2, LLaMA 3,
attempt to improve irony detection for text, and especially with and Mistral. In this work, we attempt to address the irony
short and less formally constructed text, typical on Twitter. detection scarcity for Urdu and show a possibility for
Previous works also broadened the detection of irony cross-lingual resource adaptation.
beyond English by examining the phenomenon in other
languages such as Arabic [3], Spanish varieties [4], or Dutch II. RELATED WORK
[5, 6]. In cross-linguistic settings, irony becomes even more A variety of methods for irony detection have been addressed
complex due to differences in cultural representations and in recent literature, ranging from linguistic cues to deep
linguistic constructions at both textual and discursive levels learning techniques. For instance, while transformer-based
[7]. Early methods depend on feature engineering, where models have been successful, issues related to bias in the
handcrafted features are used to model irony, with shallow mechanisms have begun to emerge as reported by [9]. Another
models being employed [8]; now however, transformer-based challenging direction is multimodal irony detection including
text and visual modalities [10] that underline the increasing
architectures, including BERT and RoBERTa, can be
challenges of multimodality.
exploited to capture complex irony patterns. Ensemble
Effectively detecting irony requires considering related
methods and transfer learning approaches have also
connotations and contexts, as demonstrated by [11], which
demonstrated success, improving the generalization
examines how model predictions vary in relation to
1
annotators. [12] proposed the emotion feature augmentation and evaluation material to create and evaluate models and
with large language models in order to further improve the large language models in our experiments.
detection of ironic sentences. [13] also offered models for
irony detection and use by proposing quantitative and 3.2. Data Preprocessing
mathematical reasoning under a zero-shot learning Good pre-processing of data was very important for the
framework, thereby paving the way for more generalized
successful training of models for irony detection in Urdu. The
systems.
processing pipeline involved a number of steps designed for
Domain adaptation remains another important aspect in
the processing of the characteristics of Urdu language text.
which [14] proposed ensemble methods for adapting irony
First, we performed some text normalization, which
detection models to other social media domains. Deep
included removing extra spaces, control characters and special
learning techniques are thoroughly surveyed by [15] in
symbols not related to textual content. To facilitate a uniform
respect of the relative potential of different architectures. In
look, diacritics, which are not always employed consistently
non-English languages, [16] introduced a semantically
in Urdu writing, were omitted. The most frequently used
informed graph neural network in the task of irony detection
in Turkish. transliterations were standardized next to ensure consistency
Outside of text, [17] investigated multi-modality of acoustic across the corpus.
and facial expression for irony detection presenting some Any text normalization done, it was lower cased, if
promising interdisciplinary approaches. Text analysis of possible, to reduce variance. Tokenization is achieved by
historical text has also developed, with [18] testing of irony language-specific tools developed with attention to Urdu’s
identification in written Spanish 19th c. language using large script-specific characteristics that reliably tokenize the text
language models. into meaningful words. Furthermore, the stop words of Urdu
The progress in ironic detection in Arabic was discussed by language were recognized and eliminated to remove the
[19], with a focus on shifting from emotion AI to cognition AI
unnecessary noise and concentrate on the semantics relevant
behavior. [20] investigated the problem of machine translation
ones.
in multilingual irony detection, and proposed approaches to
Lastly, GloVe and Word2Vec embeddings were employed
improve translation settings. The perspectivism method
to transform the preprocessed texts to dense vectorized format
proposed by [21] also contributed to the diversity in irony
for the machine learning models. For transformer-based
annotation and detection via the PERSEID challenge.
models, e.g. BERT, RoBERTa, LLaMA 2, LLaMA 3 and
Further, [22] studied profiling of irony spreaders in social
Mistral, tokenization was done with their inbuilt pre-trained
networks for improving user-based irony detection.
tokenizers with no manual embeddings composited so that
Psychological and cognitive factors have been associated with
information consists of part of tokens is comprised in rich
the comprehension of irony, [21] who linked cognitive
flexibility and trait anger with the ability to perceive and contextual manner.
understand irony. Finally,[23] investigated the interpretation
of depression by large language models, revealing recent 3.3. Feature Representation
tendencies for depression aspect.
Features were encoded with a schema of pre-trained GloVe
III. METHODOLOGY and Word2Vec embeddings in machine learning models. A
dense vector space model was learned for mapping each
3.1. Dataset Description
tokenized word based on large scale corpora to capture its
The dataset we use in the present study is the "Ironic
semantics. For each sentence or document, the word
Corpus," which was previously used for irony detection in
embeddings were averaged resulting in a fixed-length dense
English. It contains 1,950 Reddit comments marked with the
vector that encoded the global semantic information of the
tags ironic and non-ironic. Acknowledging the paucity of
language. This approach enabled machine learning classifiers
irony resources in the Urdu language, we translated this
to treat the Urdu irony dataset with success despite of rich
dataset to Urdu using a semi-automatic process which
morphology of language.
involved the use of machine translation and human
For the transformer-based models, such as BERT and
post-editing. Particular emphasis was placed on not only RoBERTa, feature representation was handled directly by
ensuring the accuracy of the intended meaning, but also the their tokenization and embedding process. These models
preservation of irony, as many idioms themselves fail to leveraged subword tokenization methods, such as Word Piece
translate directly, thereby running the risk of losing any and Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE), to handle complex word
nuanced application of context or sense of irony. structure and infrequent items. Similar to our LLaMA 2,
The item translations were subjected to a multi-stage LLaMA 3, and Mistral models, those models used the
process of quality assurance to guarantee the semantic internal tokenizers and learned embeddings during the
equivalent between the source and target languages. Other encoding to represent textual inputs as high-dimensional
vectors for a classification objective as commonly used for
NASTI annotators fluent in English & Urdu grammar
BERT and its relatives. For these large language models, we
corroborated the maintenance of irony, wit & sarcasm when
did not need to manually construct any embedding, because
necessary. The final Urdu dataset keeps the same labels as the
the model architecture itself inherently allows for
original ironic vs non-ironic, so it is also appropriate for
context-sensitive feature extraction for both tokens and
binary classification problems. This data serves as the training
2
sequences. By doing this, it established a solid benchmark for IV. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
comparative studies.
4.1. Machine Learning Models with Word2Vec
external modification of embeddings, relying solely on the
Embeddings
models' inherent transformer-based token representations.
Table 1 shows the performance of ten machine learning
3.4. Machine Learning and Large Language Models
models for Urdu irony detection trained on Word2Vec
Applied
embeddings. Eventually, the most successful model was
For a holistic comparison of irony detection in Urdu text, we Gradient Boosting (F1-Score = 88.70\%), proving its
employed a total of ten traditional machine learning (ML) resilience in capturing subtle cues when it comes to ironic
schemes in addition to five state-of-the-art transformer-based discourses. SVM and XGBoost came second, with 87.17% and
models. 86.94% of F1-Score respectively, indicating the power of
The ML models used (in weaker to stronger order) are margin-based and ensemble learning approaches. Some other
Logistic Regression (LR), SVM, Random Forest (RF), models including Logistic Regression, Random Forest, and
Gradient Boosting (GB), AdaBoost, K-NN, Naïve Bayes LightGBM also did relatively good, but were a little behind top
(MultinomialNB), DT, LightGBM, and XGBoost. These ones. Simple models such as Naive Bayes and Decision Tree
models were built based on GloVe and Word2Vec showed inferior F1-Scores comparatively, demonstrating their
embeddings. All the models were fine-tuned using incapability of capturing the complex syntactic structure
hyperparameter optimization methods. Gradient Boosting needed for proper detection of irony. The bar graph for the
proved to be the best performing among these models, with a table above visually demonstrates the superiority of ensemble
F1-Score of 89.18%. methods over the simple models. The performance differences
For the deep learning experiments, we fine-tuned pre-trained among models demonstrate that feature representation using
transformer models, BERT, RoBERTa, LLaMA 2 (7B), Word2Vec embeddings is satisfactory, but deeper contextual
LLaMA 3 (8B), and Mistral. These models were chosen knowledge is required.
because of their demonstrated potential to capture high-level
Table 1: ML Models with Word2Vec Embeddings
contextual relationships necessary for tasks such as irony
detection. Finetuning was carried out on a labeled portion of ML Model Precision Recall Accuracy F1-Score
the translated Urdu dataset. Within the LLM categories,
Logistic Regression 85.12 84.5 84.8 84.8
LLaMA 3 (8B) * appeared as the best performing model with
the remarkable F1-Score of 94.61%, overtaking the classic SVM 87.45 86.9 87.1 87.17
ML models as well as other LLMs.
Random Forest 86.01 85.2 85.7 85.6
This two-tier approach made it possible for a strong
comparison between old and new algorithms at irony detection Gradient Boosting 88.9 88.5 88.7 88.7
for the Urdu language.
AdaBoost 85.9 85 85.5 85.45
3.5. Experimental Setup K-Nearest Neighbors 82.5 81.1 81.9 81.7
Naive Bayes 80.3 79.5 79.9 79.89
Experiments for this with all experiments in this paper were
performed on Google Colab Pro with the publicly available Decision Tree 81.7 81 81.3 81.34
hosted NVIDIA A100 GPU, to allow for efficient training and
LightGBM 86.7 86.1 86.5 86.39
evaluation. Conventional machine learning models were
realized with the Scikit-learn library (version 1.2), and deep XGBoost 87.2 86.7 87 86.94
learning / transformer experiments with the Hugging Face
Transformers library (version 4.37) with PyTorch backend.
For traditional machine learning models, hyperparameter
optimization was performed using grid search, which tested
various learning rates, tree depths, and regularization
parameters. Feature vectors for ML models were performed
with pre-trained GloVe and Word2Vec embeddings.
Mixed-precision training (FP16) was also used to fine-tune on
large language models (BERT, RoBERTa, LLaMA 2, 3,
Mistral) in order to reduce memory pressure and speed up
computation. All transformer models were fine-tuned with a
batch size of 32 and a learning rate of 2e-5 for 5 epochs
according to an early stopping criterion on a validation set.
The metrics considered for the evaluation were precision,
recall, accuracy and F1-Score to give an in depth view of the
performance of each model. All experiments were repeated
three times using different random seeds and reported Figure 1: ML Models with Word2Vec Embeddings
average numbers for statistical reliability.
4.2. Machine Learning Models with GloVe Embeddings
3
We present in Table 2 the performance of the models when Table 3 and corresponding graph present the benefits of
trained with GloVe embeddings. In a manner similar to those fine-tuned large language models on the irony detection task.
observed in Word2Vec, Gradient Boosting also presented itself Unsurprisingly, LLaMA 3 (8B) exceeded all other models,
as the best-performing algorithm once again, making an scoring an amazing F1-Score of 94.61%, showcasing the
F1-Score of 89.18% and therefore a modest gain in its strength of immense transformer models to capture subtle
performance. SVM and XGBoost also achieved high
linguistic phenomena. Mistral was next with a high F1-Score
performance, with F1-Scores of 87.97% and 87.69%. Most
of 91.25% followed by RoBERTa with 89.75%. Both LLaMA
models didn’t show any significant benefit of leveraging
2 (7B) and BERT gave moderate performance with 82.75%
GloVe embeddings over Word2Vec, but researchers noted
and 78.75% F1-Score respectively. The distinct performance
that the Git repository advertisements for a subsequent task
gradient in the bar chart shows the improvement of newer and
showed gradient descent accelerating with GloVe embeddings,
larger models on the irony detection task. The findings
indicating GloVe was encoding deeper semantic relationships
reinforce that LLMs, especially the ones trained on large
more appropriate for ironic detection. These improvements are
corpora equipped with sophisticated tokenization techniques,
presented in the bar graph in the right column for almost all
models and are clearly visually confirmed by GloVe’s can achieve significant gains over traditional techniques even
superiority. Naive Bayes and Decision Tree were, again, the when fine-tuned for a low-resource language such as Urdu.
slowest classifiers, highlighting that simpler learning This study further justifies the application of LLMs on
functions are unable to capture the subtleties required for multi-faceted classification problems.
irony detection, particularly in high-dimensional space. In
general, the results of this experiment establish the fact that Table 3: Large Language Models (LLMs) Results
dense semantic embeddings, especially GloVe, contribute in
improving machine learning models' capability for
Model Precision Recall Accuracy F1-Score
recognizing irony in Urdu language.
LLaMA3(8B) 94.9 94.4 94.5 94.61
Table 2: ML Models with GloVe Embeddings
Mistral 91.5 91 91.5 91.25
RoBERTa 90 89.5 90 89.75
Model Precision Recall Accuracy F1-Score
Logistic LLaMA2(7B) 83 82.5 83 82.75
Regression 86.1 85.5 85.8 85.79 BERT 79 78.5 79 78.75
SVM 88.25 87.7 88 87.97
Random
Forest 86.9 86.2 86.6 86.54
Gradient
Boosting 89.8 89.3 89.6 89.18
AdaBoost 86.5 85.9 86.2 86.19
KNN 83.6 82.5 83 83.04
Naive Bayes 81 80.2 80.5 80.59
Decision
Tree 82.3 81.6 81.9 81.94
LightGBM 87.4 86.9 87.1 87.14
Figure 3: LLMs Performance
XGBoost 88 87.4 87.8 87.69
4.4. Overall Analysis
A comparison of the results across the three tables reveals that
model complexity and the quality of sentence representation
significantly impact the performance of irony detection. Older
machine learning models performed well, particularly when
scoped with strong embeddings like GloVe, however, it was
stuck under 90% F1-Score for even the best performing;
Gradient Boosting is observed in figure 1 and 2. On the other
hand, the very large language models, in particular LLaMA 3
(8B) performed better with more than 94% F1-Score,
highlighting that the LLaMA models have greater access to
Figure 2: ML Models Performance with GloVe contextual information as shown in figure 3. This slow pace of
improvement from Word2Vec to GloVe in the context of
4.3. Large Language Models (LLMs) Results machine learning models again implies the significance of
deeper semantic representations. Moreover, the substantial
performance leap observed for transformer-based models
4
demonstrates the transformative impact of pretraining on V., & Rosso, P. (2019, December). Idat at fire2019: Overview of the track
on irony detection in arabic tweets. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual
massive, heterogeneous data. Overall, these results suggest that
Meeting of the Forum for Information Retrieval Evaluation (pp. 10-13).
while traditional models may serve as a strong baseline,
[3] Sahoo, S., Rani-Panigrahi, C., & Pati, B. (2024). IoMT-Enabled Smart
utilizing state-of-the-art LLM models provides a significant Healthcare Models to Monitor Critical Patients Using Deep Learning
advantage in identifying subtle language phenomena like Algorithms: A Review. Computación y Sistemas, 28(4), 1823-1832.
[4] Hussain, N., Qasim, A., Akhtar, Z. U. D., Qasim, A., Mehak, G., del
irony, especially in a translated low-resource language such as
Socorro Espindola Ulibarri, L., ... & Gelbukh, A. (2023, November). Stock
Urdu. market performance analytics using xgboost. In Mexican international
conference on artificial intelligence (pp. 3-16). Cham: Springer Nature
Switzerland.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK [5] Maladry, A., Lefever, E., Van Hee, C., & Hoste, V. (2024). The limitations
of irony detection in dutch social media. Language Resources and
This paper provides a detailed analysis of irony detection Evaluation, 58(4), 1355-1386.
over Urdu text by adapting an English irony dataset, detailed [6] Ghanem, B., Karoui, J., Benamara, F., Rosso, P., & Moriceau, V. (2020).
Irony detection in a multilingual context. In Advances in Information
pre-processing and extensive experimentation over traditional
Retrieval: 42nd European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2020,
machine learning models and latest large language models Lisbon, Portugal, April 14–17, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 42 (pp.
(LLMs). Our study suggests that, even with tuned traditional 141-149). Springer International Publishing.
[7] Tomás, D., Ortega-Bueno, R., Zhang, G., Rosso, P., & Schifanella, R.
models like Gradient Boosting with an F1Score of 89.18%,
(2023). Transformer-based models for multimodal irony detection.
the generalization power of LLMs, especially LLaMA 3 (8B) Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 14(6),
with a F1Score of 94.61%, can outperform the traditional 7399-7410.
[8] Hussain, N., Qasim, A., Mehak, G., Kolesnikova, O., Gelbukh, A., &
models and establish a new SOTA in the task of detecting
Sidorov, G. (2025). Hybrid machine learning and deep learning approaches
irony. Our work on translating English irony transformations
for insult detection in roman urdu text. AI, 6(2), 33.
in Urdu, along with its preprocessing and model fine-tuning, [9] Khan, H., Habib, S., Qasim, A., Hussain, N., Usman, M., Mahmood, A., ...
proves that exploiting cross-lingual models is viable for & Zain, M. (2023, December). The Study of Human Action Recognition in
Videos with Long Short-Term Memory Model. In Annual International
developing robust cross-lingual irony detection systems for
Conference on Information Management and Big Data (pp. 217-230).
any low-resource language. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.
Several lines of future work are also generated. First, [10] Naseeb, A., Zain, M., Hussain, N., Qasim, A., Ahmad, F., Sidorov, G., &
Gelbukh, A. (2025). Machine Learning-and Deep Learning-Based
generalization can be improved by enlarging the corpus by
Multi-Model System for Hate Speech Detection on Facebook. Algorithms,
using more diverse sources of Urdu irony such as social media, 18(6), 331.
blogs, and forums. Second, combining multimodal data type [11] Frenda, S., Lo, S. O. D. A., Casola, S., Scarlini, B., Marco, C., Basile, V., &
Bernardi, D. (2023). Does anyone see the irony here? Analysis of
(e.g. emojis and images) with text data may leverage such
perspective-aware model predictions in irony detection. In CEUR
modality complementation and significantly enhance the WORKSHOP PROCEEDINGS (Vol. 3494, pp. 1-11). CEUR-WS.
quality of positive samples, which enables the model to be [12] Hussain, N., Qasim, A., Mehak, G., Kolesnikova, O., Gelbukh, A., &
Sidorov, G. (2025). ORUD-Detect: A Comprehensive Approach to
better at learning generalized contextual signals for the irony
Offensive Language Detection in Roman Urdu Using Hybrid Machine
detection task. Furthermore, further investigation of Zero-shot Learning–Deep Learning Models with Embedding Techniques.
and few-shot learning methods would enable irony detection Information, 16(2), 139.
[13] Saroj, A., & Pal, S. (2024). Ensemble-based domain adaptation on social
systems to generalize more effectively across languages and
media posts for irony detection. Multimedia Tools and Applications,
domains without large amounts of labeled data. Finally,
83(8), 23249-23268.
combining XAI methods can offer more transparency into [14] Boutsikaris, L., & Polykalas, S. (2024). A Comparative Review of Deep
model predictions, which in turn may increase confidence in Learning Techniques on the Classification of Irony and Sarcasm in Text.
IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence.
the application of irony detection systems in practice.
[15] Bölücü, N., & Can, B. (2025). Semantically-Informed Graph Neural
Networks for Irony Detection in Turkish. ACM Transactions on Asian and
ACKNOWLEGMENT Low-Resource Language Information Processing, 24(1), 1-20.
[16] Zain, M., Hussain, N., Qasim, A., Mehak, G., Ahmad, F., Sidorov, G., &
Gelbukh, A. (2025). RU-OLD: A Comprehensive Analysis of Offensive
This work was partially supported by the Mexican Language Detection in Roman Urdu Using Hybrid Machine Learning,
Government through the grant A1-S-47854 of CONACYT, Deep Learning, and Transformer Models. Algorithms, 18(7), 396.
[17] Cohen, K., Manrique-Gómez, L., & Manrique, R. (2025). Historical Ink:
Mexico, and the grants 20254236, 20253468, and 20254341
Exploring Large Language Models for Irony Detection in 19th-Century
provided by the Secretar´a de Investigacio´n y Posgrado of the
Spanish. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22585.
Instituto Polite´cnico Nacional, Mexico. We gratefully [18] Hussain, N., Qasim, A., Mehak, G., Zain, M., Hafeez, M., & Sidorov, G.
acknowledge the computing resources made available through (2025). Fine-Tuning Large Language Models with QLoRA for Offensive
Language Detection in Roman Urdu-English Code-Mixed Text. arXiv
the Plataforma de Aprendizaje Profundo para Tecnolog´ıas del
preprint arXiv:2510.03683.
Lenguaje of the Laboratorio de Superco´mputo at the INAOE, [19] CHIA, Z. (2024). Exploring Optimal Settings for Machine Translation of
Mexico, funded by CONACYT. Additionally, we express our Irony with Application to Multilingual Irony Detection.
[20] Hussain, N., Qasim, A., Mehak, G., Zain, M., Sidorov, G., Gelbukh, A., &
sincere gratitude to Microsoft for their support through the
Kolesnikova, O. (2025). Multi-Level depression severity detection with
Microsoft Latin America PhD Award, which has significantly deep Transformers and enhanced machine learning techniques. AI, 6(7),
contributed to the success of this work. 157.
[21] Hazrati, L., Sokhandan, A., & Farzinvash, L. (2025). Improving irony
speech spreaders profiling on social networks using clustering &
REFERENCES
transformer-based models. Language Resources and Evaluation, 1-31.
[22] Zheng, Y., Lyu, H., & Luo, J. (2025). Irony in Emojis: A Comparative
[1] Mendoza, O., Tovar Vidal, M., & Contreras, M. (2025). Applied Study of Human and LLM Interpretation. arXiv preprint
Unsupervised Learning for Pattern Recognition of Depression cases within
arXiv:2501.11241.
a Young Adult Population. Computación y Sistemas, 29(1), 241-251.
[23] Qasim, A., Mehak, G., Hussain, N., Gelbukh, A., & Sidorov, G. (2025).
[2] Meque, A. G. M., Hussain, N., Sidorov, G., & Gelbukh, A. (2023).
Detection of Depression Severity in Social Media Text Using
Machine learning-based guilt detection in text. Scientific
Transformer-Based Models. Information, 16(2), 114.
Reports, 13(1), 11441.Ghanem, B., Karoui, J., Benamara, F., Moriceau,
5