Single-Nodal Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking in NLP Models
Shalom Rosnerb,1, Ronit D. Grossa,1, Ella Koresha,1, and Ido Kantera,b,*
aDepartment of Physics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, 52900, Israel.
b Gonda Interdisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, 52900, Israel.
*Corresponding author at: Department of Physics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, 52900, Israel.
E-mail address: ido.kanter@biu.ac.il (I. Kanter).
1These authors equally contributed to this work
Abstract
Spontaneous symmetry breaking in statistical mechanics primarily occurs during phase
transitions at the thermodynamic limit where the Hamiltonian preserves inversion
symmetry, yet the low-temperature free energy exhibits reduced symmetry. Herein, we
demonstrate the emergence of spontaneous symmetry breaking in natural language
processing (NLP) models during both pre-training and fine-tuning, even under
deterministic dynamics and within a finite training architecture. This phenomenon occurs
at the level of individual attention heads and is scaled-down to its small subset of nodes
and also valid at a single-nodal level, where nodes acquire the capacity to learn a limited
set of tokens after pre-training or labels after fine-tuning for a specific classification task.
As the number of nodes increases, a crossover in learning ability occurs, governed by the
tradeoff between a decrease following random-guess among increased possible outputs,
and enhancement following nodal cooperation, which exceeds the sum of individual nodal
capabilities. In contrast to spin-glass systems, where a microscopic state of frozen spins
cannot be directly linked to the free-energy minimization goal, each nodal function in this
framework contributes explicitly to the global network task and can be upper-bounded
using convex hull analysis. Results are demonstrated using BERT-6 architecture pre-
trained on Wikipedia dataset and fine-tuned on the FewRel classification task.
1. Introduction
One of the most fundamental phenomena in physics is spontaneous symmetry breaking
which emerges in many different physical systems [1-4]. In dynamic systems,
spontaneous symmetry breaking indicates that the low-temperature free energy exhibits
reduced symmetry compared to that of the underlying theoretical description. It occurs
without a noticeable macroscopic external field, and is typically induced by non-extensive
preferential uniform or random external fields, or initial conditions that break the
symmetry. An example from statistical physics is the ferromagnetic Ising system in two or
more dimensions [5, 6], where at low temperatures, the system develops a macroscopic
magnetization that spontaneously aligns either up or down, with both states possessing
the same free energy. In such ordered systems, the time average of a microscopic part
of the system, such as that of a single Ising spin, can reveal the macroscopic state of the
entire system. Conversely, for disordered systems, such as a spin-glass system [7], the
equilibrium state of the entire system cannot be deduced from the time-dependent frozen
behavior of an individual spin.
Spontaneous symmetry breaking has recently been determined as a key mechanism
underlying deep learning models [8, 9]. The deep learning architecture, which comprises
disordered weights, splits the learning task among its parallel learning components
comprising filters in convolutional neural networks [9, 10] and attention heads in
transformer architectures [11-14]. Enhanced cooperation among these building blocks
along the architecture's layers and within each layer enhances the signal-to-noise ratio
and learning capabilities. A necessary component for the emergence of spontaneous
symmetry breaking in deep networks is randomness in the initial conditions. If all filters or
attention heads within a layer are initialized with identical parameters, weights and biases,
symmetry among them is preserved, preventing spontaneous symmetry breaking, and
neutralizing efficient learning.
This study demonstrates that spontaneous symmetry breaking in natural language
processing (NLP) models can be scaled-down to the level of single nodes within attention
heads during pre-training and fine-tuning NLP tasks [13-15]. This spontaneous symmetry
breaking can be observed even at the single-node level, where a node is capable of
learning a small number of tokens after the pre-training process or identifying several
labels after fine-tuning for a specific classification task. Furthermore, the learning
capability of several nodes exceeds the sum of their individual nodal learning capabilities
as a result of cooperation. The results are demonstrated using BERT-6 architecture [16]
trained using a small subset of the Wikipedia dataset [17] and fine-tuned using the fully
supervised FewRel classification task [18]. These findings indicate that spontaneous
symmetry breaking can occur even at the smallest scale of a finite network, which can
evolve under deterministic dynamics without stochastic updates, similar to zero-
temperature dynamics in infinite physical systems.
2. BERT-6 architecture
The behavior of each node in the attention head output and its role in facilitating learning
for NLP tasks are presented using the BERT-6 architecture [19, 20], comprising the
following three main parts (Fig. 1). The first is an embedding layer comprising 30,522
tokens representing each word or sub-word in the Wikipedia dataset (Fig. 1, left). Each
token is embedded [21-23] into a 768 dimensional vector using an embedding layer. The
embedding layer encodes the lexical meaning of a token and its position within the input.
The length of the input sequence was fixed at 128 tokens, and any unused space is
padded using a [PAD] token [24]. The second part of the architecture consists of six-
transformer encoders comprising query, key, and value (QKV) attention, followed by
projection and feedforward (FF) layers (Fig. 1, middle) [16]. The number of input and
output dimensions for this part of the architecture is 768 per input token (Fig. 1, right).
The QKV attention comprises 12 heads with 768 input and 64 output dimensions per head
and input token (Fig. 1, right). The last part is a classifier head comprising two fully
connected (FC) layers terminating at 30,522 outputs representing the tokens (Fig. 1, left,
purple).
Fig. 1. Scheme of the BERT-6 architecture (left), where each transformer encoder
comprises query, key, and value (QKV) attention, projection, and feedforward layers
(middle). The QKV attention comprises 12 heads with 64 dimension output nodes per
head and input token, resulting in 768 (= 12× 64) output dimensions.
3. Computational capability of a head using the confusion matrix
The functionality of each of the 12 heads in the six-transformer encoder block of the
BERT-6 architecture pre-trained on a small Wikipedia dataset comprising 90,000
paragraphs [17] was quantified using the following method. The first five transformer
encoder blocks and QKV attention of the six-transformer encoder block remained
unchanged (frozen). The 128×768 output nodes of the scaled dot-product attention were
connected to a classifier head trained on 90,000 Wikipedia paragraphs to minimize the
loss function (Fig. 2, left). This small training dataset was selected to overcome our limited
computational resources and was shown to maintain the qualitative results obtained using
the entire Wikipedia dataset [17]. The accuracy of this partial BERT-6 architecture was
estimated using 90,000 validation dataset comprising 28,273 tokens. The results indicate
an average accuracy per token (APT) of 0.36 for ~23,188 tokens that were predicted
correctly at least once in the masked process.
The functionality of each of the 12 heads was estimated by silencing the 768 input
nodes to the trained classifier head, except for the 64 that belonged to the examined head
(as exemplified for a pair of nodes in Fig. 2, right). Consequently, the 30,522 output units
representing the tokens were influenced only by the 64 nodes of that head. The validation
dataset was then propagated through the first five pre-trained transformer blocks, as well
as through the unsilenced output units of the QKV attention of the sixth block, generating
a 30,522× 30,522 confusion matrix. Each matrix element (𝑖, 𝑗) represents the number of
times an output unit 𝑗, representing token 𝑗, was selected by validation inputs with masked
token 𝑖 (Fig. 2, right).
Fig. 2. A classifier head (yellow) connected to the 768 QKV attention output units of the
6th transformer encoder is trained using 90,000 Wikipedia paragraphs to minimize the loss
function (left). All weights of the first fully connected layer of the classifier head are
silenced (light gray) except for the emerging weights from a pair of selected nodes (black).
The 30,522× 30,522 confusion matrix is generated using a validation dataset, which is
used to quantify a subset of nodal performance.
The number of positive diagonal elements of the confusion matrix, representing mask
tokens that were correctly predicted at least once, varied among the 12 heads with
average of 3,507 (Fig. 3A). The APT of the positive diagonal elements (0.043) fluctuates
slightly among heads (Fig. 3B); this value is three orders of magnitude greater than the
APT value of a random-guess (1/30,522). The diagonal confidence fluctuates slightly
among heads, yielding an average of 0.176 (Fig. 3C), and is defined as the ratio between
the sum of the positive diagonal elements of the confusion matrix and their corresponding
columns. This measure represents the ratio of the total number of correctly predicted
mask tokens to the total number of predicted outcomes for these tokens. The fraction of
elements in the occupied columns with zero diagonal elements is less than a few percent;
hence, the diagonal confidence and the confidence obtained using the full confusion
matrix are typically very similar.
The computational capability of each of the heads is evident (Fig. 3), where the total
number of tokens recognized by all of the heads was 13,243 out of the 28,273 in the
validation dataset. Notably, most of the unrecognized tokens were those with low
frequencies. For frequencies greater than 100 the heads recognized 8,428 tokens out of
9,386 in the dataset. The focusing of each head on a subset of tokens represents
spontaneous symmetry breaking, as there is no directed order in the learning process to
assign a specific subset of tokens for each head. This occurred following the random
initial conditions of the weights and the biases of each one of the heads. Notably, in case
of deterministic dynamics, that is, no dropouts [25] or stochastic gradient descent [26,
27], starting from the same initial conditions for the 12 heads within each layer, their
weights will remain the same throughout the learning process. Consequently, there is one
head per layer, and the learning almost vanishes.
The APT of each individual head (Table 1) was considerably lower than the APT
obtained for the entire twelve heads (~0.36), indicating the importance of cooperation
among the heads. The effect of cooperation among 𝑛 heads is estimated, similarly to the
single-head procedure (Fig. 2, middle), by silencing the 768 input nodes to the trained
classifier head except the 𝑛⋅64 nodes that belong to the examined heads. The results
indicate an increase in the average APT with 𝑛, simultaneously with the number of positive
diagonal elements and diagonal confidence (Table 1). The training process splits the
learning task among the heads using spontaneous symmetry breaking, which is
represented by the confusion matrices; however, there are additional hidden correlations
among the output fields of the heads, contributing further to the average APT. This gap
was attributed to events in which a mask token was selected following the summation of
the output fields emerging from the 12 heads, contradicting the decision following the
individual confusion matrices. Hence, cooperation among the output fields of the 12
heads enhanced the APT.
Fig. 3. Performance of the twelve heads in the six-transformer encoder. (A) Number of
tokens with positive diagonal elements in each one of the confusion matrices. (B) Average
APT per head for tokens with positive diagonal elements. (C) Diagonal confidence
measuring the ratio between the sum of the diagonal positive elements of each confusion
matrix and their sum of corresponding columns. The average for each panel is denoted
(dashed horizontal red-line).
No.of Heads No. of tokens APT Diagonal confidence
1 3,507 0.043 0.176
2 9,867 0.093 0.286
4 18,061 0.209 0.455
12 23,188 0.365 0.614
Table 1. Properties of the confusion matrix combining the output of several heads (first
column). Number of tokens with positive diagonal elements (second column), and their
average APT and diagonal confidence values (third and fourth columns) as a function of
the number of heads. The results of each row denote the average over the twelve heads.
4. Spontaneous symmetry breaking at the nodal level
The computational capability of a single node, as well as a subgroup of nodes in the six-
encoder block of the pre-trained BERT-6, was evaluated similarly to the estimation of the
functionality of a single head. The first five transformer encoder blocks and the QKV
attention of the six-transformer encoder block remained unchanged (frozen), and their
128×768 output units were connected to a classifier head trained to minimize the loss
function (Fig. 2, left). The functionality of a subset of the QKV output nodes was estimated
by silencing the 768 input nodes to the trained classifier head, except for the selected
nodal subset (Fig. 2, middle). Consequently, the 30,522 output units representing the
tokens were influenced solely by the limited aperture of a small subgroup of nodes or a
single node. The results were based on an analysis of the confusion matrix generated
using a limited aperture.
The confusion matrix number of positive diagonal elements increases from ~3.7 for one
node to ~3500 for 64 nodes (Fig. 4A and Table 1). The results were almost insensitive to
whether the subgroup of nodes was selected from one head or at random from the
768 inputs. A random output guess among the average of ~3.7 possible selected input
tokens results in an APT of 1/3.7~0.27. The obtained average APT value of 0.405 (Fig.
4B) indicates an enhancement in the learning capability of a single node compared with
the APT value of a random-guess. Nevertheless, the diagonal confidence is very low
~0.03, as almost all the ~28,000 mask tokens in the validation set are predicted as the
output of the 3.7 diagonal tokens.
In the case of two input nodes, there are on average 8.1 possible selected output tokens
and a measured diagonal APT value of 0.233 (Fig. 4A), which is considerably enhanced
compared with a random-guess APT value of 1/8.1~0.123. As the number of input nodes
is increased up to 12, the number of classified tokens increased, whereas the average
diagonal APT decreased. In this region, the decrease in the random-guess APT,
1/(𝑁𝑜.𝑜𝑓 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠), dominates the enhancement by cooperative learning using
a few input nodes, resulting in a decrease in the average diagonal APT (Fig. 4B).
However, a crossover occurred when the number of input nodes exceeds 12 (Figs. 4B
and 4D), where the average diagonal APT increased as a function of the number of input
nodes, although the random-guess APT decreased. This crossover indicates enhanced
cooperative learning among the input nodes compared with the decreased baseline
following a random-guess. In contrast to the non-monotonicity of the average diagonal
APT (Figs. 4B and 4D), the diagonal confidence was monotonic. Almost all the mask
tokens are predicted as the output of one of the diagonal tokens, and the probability of
finding a non-zero column with zero diagonal element is very low. The number and sum
values of the positive diagonal elements increase as a function of the number of input
nodes, whereas the sum of their corresponding columns decreases, resulting in
monotonically increased diagonal confidence.
The phenomenon where high APT values are obtained for a small number of tokens
and a zero APT value for the rest (Fig. 4A) indicates spontaneous symmetry breaking by
a few nodes, and even by a single node. In the training procedure, there was no
preference for assigning a small subset of tokens to a given node or a small subset of
nodes. This spontaneous symmetry breaking occurs following the initial conditions of the
network and probably also following the selected order of the training inputs.
Fig. 4. Pre-training performance as a function of the number of output attention nodes of
the six-transformer encoder. (A) Number of classified tokens selected as the positive
diagonal elements in the confusion matrix. (B) Average accuracy per token (APT) of the
diagonal tokens (blue) and average APT of a random-guess among the diagonal tokens
(orange). (C) Diagonal confidence measuring the ratio between the sum of positive
diagonal elements and their columns. (D) The same description as that listed in panel B
applies for up to 768 output attention nodes.
5. FewRel classification using a few nodes
A similar phenomenon of spontaneous symmetry breaking by a small subset of nodes as
observed in the pre-training process also occurs in a fully supervised FewRel
classification task [27, 28], comprising 64 output labels, each with 630 training and 70 test
instances.
A pre-trained BERT-6 over 90,000 small Wikipedia dataset was subsequently fine-tuned
for the FewRel classification task. Subsequently, the 768 output nodes of the attention of
the six-transformer encoder block were trained using a classifier head comprising only
one 768×64 FC layer. The functionality of a selected subset of nodes was estimated by
silencing 768 input nodes to the trained classifier head, excluding the selected subset of
nodes (Fig. 2, middle) [11]. Consequently, the 64 output units representing the FewRel
labels are influenced solely by the limited aperture of a small subgroup of nodes or a
single node [8]. The results were based on the analysis of the 64×64 confusion matrix
generated by such a limited aperture.
The number of positive diagonal elements in the confusion matrix increased from ~4.5
for a single node to ~62 for 64 nodes (Fig. 5A). For one node, the average diagonal
accuracy of ~0.36 exceeded the random-guess accuracy of 1/4.5~0.22, indicating an
efficient classification even with a single attention output node (Fig. 5B). For the two input
nodes, there are ~9 positive diagonal elements, and an average diagonal accuracy of
0.23 is considerably higher than the random-guess accuracy of 1/9~0.11. Compared with
the average diagonal accuracy, which is non-monotonic, the diagonal confidence
increases monotonically as a function of the number of input nodes, whereas almost all
inputs predict one of the diagonal labels (Fig. 5C, similar to 4C).
When the number of input nodes increased up to six, the number of classified labels,
positive diagonal elements in the confusion matrix, increased, whereas the average
diagonal accuracy decreased (Figs. 5A and 5B). In this region, the decrease in accuracy
was dominated by the random-guess accuracy, 1/(𝑁𝑜.𝑜𝑓 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑒𝑑 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙𝑠), over the
enhancement by cooperative learning using a few input nodes (Fig. 5B). A crossover
occurred when the number of input nodes exceeds six (Figs. 5B and 5D), similar to the
observed crossover in the diagonal APT value (Fig. 4B).
The results clearly indicate spontaneous symmetry breaking in a classification task by
a few nodes, and even by a single node, without any preference in the training procedure,
similar to the phenomenon observed in the pre-training procedure (Fig. 4).
Fig. 5. Classification performance by a subset of output attention nodes of the six-
transformer encoder using the FewRel dataset. (A) Number of classified labels - positive
diagonal elements in the 64×64 confusion matrix. (B) Average accuracy (Acc.) of the
diagonal labels (blue) and the average Acc. following a random-guess among the
diagonal labels (orange). (C) Diagonal confidence. (D) The same description as that listed
in panel B applies for up to 768 output attention nodes.
6. Upper bound for classification using a few nodes
The computational capability of a few attention output nodes was sufficient to predict
several mask tokens or classify FewRel labels with high accuracy, with performance
improving as the number of output nodes increased. Nevertheless, this computational
capability efficiency is in question because, theoretically, even a single node connected
to the 30,522 output units with certain weights and biases can distinguish between all
possible tokens for selected input ranges. Nevertheless, the objective of learning is to
generate an appropriate input range common for all the input instances belonging to the
same class, resulting in a correctly selected output. Hence, quantifying the achievable
computational efficiency of a few nodes given their weights and biases requires a
mathematical approach. This approach calculates the upper bound for distinguishable
classes by assuming all the possible input ranges that are not necessarily realized by the
learning process. Analyzing the gap between distinguishable classes realizable by the
network with the mathematical approach can shed light on the role and the efficiency of
spontaneous symmetry breaking with respect to the learning task.
For a fine-tuned BERT-6 using the fully supervised FewRel dataset, the upper bound
for the computational capability of a few nodes can be analyzed using a trained classifier
head comprising one layer, from the 768 outputs of the six-transformer encoder to the
64 output nodes. Given the fine-tuned weights emerging from a few input nodes to the 64
output units and their biases, the maximum achievable number of positive diagonal
confusion matrix elements can be quantified, assuming unconstrained input ranges. This
upper bound can be obtained using a standard result from a convex hull analysis. The
output space dimension is defined as the number of input nodes plus one, such that for
each output node, a point is assigned according to its incoming weights and bias. A point
can only maximize a linear function if it lies on the supporting face of the convex hull [29].
The convex hull is the smallest convex set that contains all points (intuitively, the “rubber-
band” envelope around them). Only the upper part of the hull is retained, i.e., faces that
are “visible from above” along the bias axis [30]. The unique vertices appearing on these
upward-facing faces correspond exactly to the number of output nodes that can be
maximized for a subset of nodes for unconstrained inputs. Counting these output nodes
yielded an upper bound for the number of positive diagonal elements in the confusion
matrix.
Applying this type of convex hull analysis while using the fine-tuning weights and biases
of the one-layer classifier head indicates that for one input node, the number of positive
diagonal elements in the confusion matrix, recognized labels, is very close to the upper
bound (Fig. 6A). The gap between the number of recognized labels and the upper bound
increased in the cases of two and four input nodes (Figs. 6B and 6C); while the variance
among different subsets of nodes was small. The increasing gap as a function of the
number of input nodes suggests that the learning process is non-optimal. It is likely that
some additional labels recognized by the upper bound were excluded because of the
limited classifier head input ranges utilized by the trained network.
The upper bound for the recognized labels of the classifier head was similar to the
bound achieved by both the randomly initialized and fine-tuned BERT-6. Hence, the upper
bound does not evolve considerably during the learning process. Nevertheless, the main
difference between a random system in comparison to a trained system is the number of
predicted labels and non-zero columns in the confusion matrix, which is approximately
two, independent of the size of the input nodes. This observation indicates that learning
implemented by spontaneous symmetry breaking mainly directs a class of input instances
to a limited specific input range and selects the correct label.
Fig. 6. Number of recognized labels using a small subset of input nodes of a trained
classifier head to the 64 output units of the fine-tuned BERT-6 on the FewRel dataset. (A)
Number of positive diagonal elements of the confusion matrix, i.e., the number of
recognized labels for 25 single input nodes (blue) and for the upper bound for the same
nodes (orange). (B) The description is the same as that listed in panel A but for 20 pairs
of input labels. (C) The description is the same as that listed in panel A but for 20 sets of
quadruplets input nodes.
7. Discussion
Spontaneous symmetry breaking in statistical mechanics primarily occurs in phase
transitions wherein the Hamiltonian obeys, for instance, inversion symmetry, and the low-
temperature free energy has a reduced symmetry. The emergence of this phenomenon
typically requires two conditions: stochastic dynamics at finite temperatures and ergodic
time divergence at the thermodynamic limit — infinite systems. The mechanism that
prefers one of the symmetries of the system can be a non-extensive external field at the
boundary of the bulk material, particularly in the case of second-order phase transitions,
an infinitesimal random field on each degree of freedom, or initial conditions of the
degrees of freedom with a small bias to one of the system’s symmetries. The presented
results indicate the emergence of spontaneous symmetry breaking for NLP tasks, even
under zero-temperature dynamics, deterministic pre-training and fine-tuning procedures,
such as those without dropout [25] and with a finite training architecture.
The spontaneous symmetry breaking at the level of a single and a small subset of nodes
differs from a similar phenomenon in the phase transition of disordered systems, such as
spin glasses. For instance, in an Ising spin-glass without an external magnetic field, the
Hamiltonian obeys inversion symmetry, where below the transition temperature a frozen
spin breaks its inversion symmetry [31-34]. However, by observing the frozen state of a
single spin or a small subset of spins, one cannot deduce the equilibrium state of the
entire system, that is, the frozen directions of all the spins. The goal of a physical system
is to minimize the free energy which its macroscopic state cannot be deduced from the
frozen information of a microscopic number of spins. In contrast to spin-glass systems,
the examined NLP models indicate that the spontaneous symmetry breaking of a small
number of nodes is related to the implementation of the network’s task.
The phenomenon of APT crossover as a function of the number of examined input
nodes was also found to be relevant to the FewRel accuracy that may indicate a universal
behavior that governs other tasks and architectures. This is supported by the following
argument adopted from the analysis of the binary classification capacity of a committee
machine, which represents a majority decision among 𝐾 Perceptrons [35, 36]. For 𝐾 = 1
and random binary inputs, the capacity per weight is 2 [37, 38], whereas for 𝐾 = 3, the
capacity per weight is ~3 [39] which increased further at increasing 𝐾 values [40]. For
example, the increased capacity for 𝐾 = 3 beyond 2 is attributed to the fact that the output
is determined by two, out of the three, Perceptrons which correctly predict the desired
output, where there are three such legal internal representations. Hence, an input–output
relation must be learned by cooperation between two Perceptrons only, which enhances
the capacity per weight beyond 2. The number of legal internal representations grows
exponentially as a function of the number of inputs, and the learning task is to maximize
the capacity by assigning similar internal representations for correlated inputs. The
degeneracy of the legal internal representations increases exponentially according to
2𝐾−1, resulting in increasing capacity.
In the examined NLP tasks, binary inputs and outputs were replaced by continuous
fields. The constraint for correct classification requires the strongest output field for the
correct output label. This constraint can be generalized by the fact that the maximal field
on the correct output label is the result of the sum of the output fields attributed to several
input nodes. As the number of input nodes increases, the number of recognized labels
increases, and the following two conflicting trends coexist. First, a linear decrease in the
accuracy is expected following a random decision. Second, the possibility of enhanced
learning following field summation emerging from several input nodes increases
exponentially, similar to the increased number of legal internal representations with 𝐾
units in the committee machine. For a small number of input nodes, the first trend
dominates, and the accuracy decreases with an increase in the number of recognized
labels, whereas for a larger number of input units, the second trend dominates, and a
crossover occurs.
Finally, the reported phenomenon of spontaneous symmetry breaking among the
heads—as measured by the number of positive diagonal elements in the confusion
matrix—becomes more prominent along the transformer blocks. It can be used to
optimize the learning architecture and to enhance the learning algorithm. From a
biological point of view, learning using a single node agrees with neuronal plasticity in the
form of dendritic learning enabling a single neuron to acquire powerful computational
capability [41-44]. Nevertheless, the presented results are based on a single pre-trained
architecture using a small training dataset and one classification task. They require
validation in other NLP tasks and datasets using enhanced computational resources.
Appendix
1. Dataset and preprocessing
The datasets used in this study are FewRel [18] and Wikipedia [45]. Each dataset was
tokenized using the BERT-base-uncased tokenizer from the HuggingFace Transformers
library [16, 46], which converts raw text into 30,522 token IDs. Tokenization was
performed using the following configuration: truncation to a maximum length of 128
tokens or padding to the same length.
2. Optimization
The CrossEntropyLoss [47] function was selected for the classification task and
minimized using the stochastic gradient descent algorithm [26, 48] and the AdamW
optimizer [49] was used. The maximal accuracy was determined by searching through
the hyper-parameters (see below). The L2 regularization method [50] was applied during
training.
To pre-train our models, we employed a Masked Language Modeling (MLM) objective
similar to that used in the original BERT architecture [16]. Following standard masking
strategy [46], 15% of tokens were selected for prediction. Of these, 80% were replaced
with [MASK] token, 10% with random tokens, and the remaining 10% were left
unchanged. Special tokens (e.g., [PAD], [CLS], [SEP]) were excluded from masking.
3. Hyper-parameters
The hyper-parameters 𝜂 (learning rate) and 𝛼 (L2 regularization) were optimized for offline
learning, using a mini-batch size of 32 inputs. The learning-rate decay schedule was also
optimized. For all the simulations, a linear scheduler was applied using the HuggingFace
utility [46], with zero warm-up steps and a total number of training steps equal to the
number of epochs. This schedule gradually causes the learning rate to decay from its
initial value to zero in a linear fashion throughout training, which helps stabilize
convergence [51].
The pre-training models in all the simulations were trained for 50 epochs with 𝜂 = 5.5𝑒−
5,𝛼 = 1𝑒−2 and a linear scheduler was applied [17]. The pre-training of the classifier
head for the Wikipedia dataset was trained for 50 epochs with 𝜂 = 1𝑒 −4,𝛼 = 8𝑒 −6 and
a linear scheduler was applied. The same setup was examined for the pre-trained model
without dropout, which yielded comparable spontaneous symmetry breaking for APT and
classification on the level of a head as well as for a small subset of attention output nodes
and a single output node, where the average APT and classification were only slightly
reduced.
The fine-tuning on the FewRel task was applied for the pre-trained model on 90,000
randomly selected subsets of Wikipedia [45] dataset [17] which was trained for 50 epochs
with 𝜂 = 5.5𝑒−5,𝛼 = 1𝑒 −2 and a linear scheduler was applied. The fine-tuning on the
classifier head for the FewRel dataset was trained for 20 epochs with 𝜂 = 5𝑒 −5,𝛼 =
8𝑒−6 and a linear scheduler was applied.
For Figs. 1-4, pre-training was performed on 90,000 randomly selected subsets of
Wikipedia [45] dataset. The classifier head didn’t include biases and was trained on the
same training dataset. Silenced nodes were applied only on the input to the classifier
head.
For Fig. 5, the pre-training was performed on 90,000 randomly selected subsets of
Wikipedia dataset [45]. The classifier head comprised of one FC layer with biases and
was fine-tuned on FewRel training dataset. As before, silencing was applied only at the
input to the classifier head.
4. Confusion matrix
The confusion matrix was constructed using an MLM-style evaluation procedure. Instead
of randomly masking tokens, we deterministically masked each non-special token in
every sentence (one token at a time) across 90,000 validation samples. As a result, each
token was evaluated exactly as many times as it appeared in the dataset (i.e., according
to its empirical frequency), thereby eliminating run-to-run variability across different
testing iterations.
From the resulting confusion matrix, we compute the Accuracy Per Token (APT) by
dividing each diagonal element by the sum of its corresponding row (considering only
tokens with nonzero frequency).
2.4. Statistics
Statistics for all results were obtained using several samples and the standard division
was around 1% for all the results.
2.5. Hardware and software
We used Google Colab and its available GPUs. We used Pytorch for all the programming
processes.
[1] J. Bernstein, Spontaneous symmetry breaking, gauge theories, the Higgs mechanism and all
that, Reviews of modern physics, 46 (1974) 7.
[2] S. Frauendorf, Spontaneous symmetry breaking in rotating nuclei, Reviews of Modern
Physics, 73 (2001) 463.
[3] L. Michel, Symmetry defects and broken symmetry. Configurations hidden symmetry,
Reviews of Modern Physics, 52 (1980) 617.
[4] H. Kawamura, Chiral ordering in Heisenberg spin glasses in two and three dimensions, Phys
Rev Lett, 68 (1992) 3785.
[5] C. Domb, Phase transitions and critical phenomena, Elsevier, 2000.
[6] E. Agliari, A. Barra, F. Camboni, Criticality in diluted ferromagnets, Journal of Statistical
Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2008 (2008) P10003.
[7] M. Mézard, G. Parisi, M.A. Virasoro, Spin glass theory and beyond: An Introduction to the
Replica Method and Its Applications, World Scientific Publishing Company, 1987.
[8] E. Koresh, R.D. Gross, Y. Meir, Y. Tzach, T. Halevi, I. Kanter, Unified CNNs and transformers
underlying learning mechanism reveals multi-head attention modus vivendi, Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 666 (2025) 130529.
[9] Y. Tzach, R.D. Gross, E. Koresh, S. Rosner, O. Shpringer, T. Halevi, I. Kanter, Learning
mechanism underlying NLP pre-training and fine-tuning, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, (2025) 131113.
[10] Y. Meir, Y. Tzach, S. Hodassman, O. Tevet, I. Kanter, Towards a universal mechanism for
successful deep learning, Sci Rep-Uk, 14 (2024) 5881.
[11] R.D. Gross, T. Halevi, E. Koresh, Y. Tzach, I. Kanter, Low-latency vision transformers via large-
scale multi-head attention, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23832, (2025).
[12] T. Halevi, Y. Tzach, R.D. Gross, S. Rosner, I. Kanter, Self-attention vector output similarities
reveal how machines pay attention, arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21956, (2025).
[13] Y. Chang, X. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Wu, L. Yang, K. Zhu, H. Chen, X. Yi, C. Wang, Y. Wang, A survey
on evaluation of large language models, ACM transactions on intelligent systems and
technology, 15 (2024) 1–45.
[14] V. Ashish, Attention is all you need, Advances in neural information processing systems, 30
(2017) I.
[15] Z. Jiang, F.F. Xu, J. Araki, G. Neubig, How can we know what language models know?,
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8 (2020) 423–438.
[16] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding, in: Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North
American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language
technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers), 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[17] R.D. Gross, Y. Tzach, T. Halevi, E. Koresh, I. Kanter, Tiny language models, Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, (2025) 131102.
[18] X. Han, H. Zhu, P. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Yao, Z. Liu, M. Sun, FewRel: A large-scale supervised few-
shot relation classification dataset with state-of-the-art evaluation, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.10147, (2018).
[19] J.D.M.-W.C. Kenton, L.K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding, in: Proceedings of naacL-HLT, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019.
[20] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, V.
Stoyanov, Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692, (2019).
[21] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, J. Dean, Efficient estimation of word representations in
vector space, arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, (2013).
[22] S. Selva Birunda, R. Kanniga Devi, A review on word embedding techniques for text
classification, Innovative Data Communication Technologies and Application: Proceedings of
ICIDCA 2020, (2021) 267–281.
[23] R. Boselli, S. D’Amico, N. Nobani, eXplainable AI for word embeddings: A survey, Cognitive
Computation, 17 (2025) 19.
[24] O. Kovaleva, A. Romanov, A. Rogers, A. Rumshisky, Revealing the dark secrets of BERT, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.08593, (2019).
[25] P. Baldi, P.J. Sadowski, Understanding dropout, Advances in neural information processing
systems, 26 (2013).
[26] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–
778.
[27] J. Schmidhuber, Deep learning, in: Encyclopedia of machine learning and data mining,
Springer, 2016, pp. 1–11.
[28] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, G. Hinton, Deep learning, Nature, 521 (2015) 436–444.
[29] R.T. Rockafellar, Convex analysis:(pms-28), (2015).
[30] G.M. Ziegler, Lectures on 0/1-polytopes, in: Polytopes—combinatorics and computation,
Springer, 2000, pp. 1–41.
[31] K. Binder, A.P. Young, Spin glasses: Experimental facts, theoretical concepts, and open
questions, Reviews of Modern physics, 58 (1986) 801.
[32] A. Barra, G. Dal Ferraro, D. Tantari, Mean field spin glasses treated with PDE techniques,
The European Physical Journal B, 86 (2013) 332.
[33] E. Agliari, F. Alemanno, A. Barra, A. Fachechi, On the Marchenko–Pastur law in analog
bipartite spin-glasses, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 52 (2019) 254002.
[34] A. Barra, G. Genovese, F. Guerra, D. Tantari, How glassy are neural networks?, Journal of
Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2012 (2012) P07009.
[35] M. Biehl, E. Schlösser, M. Ahr, Phase transitions in soft-committee machines, Europhys Lett,
44 (1998) 261.
[36] M. Rosen-Zvi, A. Engel, I. Kanter, Multilayer neural networks with extensively many hidden
units, Phys Rev Lett, 87 (2001) 078101.
[37] E. Gardner, B. Derrida, Optimal storage properties of neural network models, Journal of
Physics A: Mathematical and general, 21 (1988) 271.
[38] M. Minsky, S.A. Papert, Perceptrons, reissue of the 1988 expanded edition with a new
foreword by Léon Bottou: an introduction to computational geometry, MIT press, 2017.
[39] A. Priel, M. Blatt, T. Grossmann, E. Domany, I. Kanter, Computational capabilities of
restricted two-layered perceptrons, Phys Rev E, 50 (1994) 577.
[40] Y. Xiong, C. Kwon, J.-H. Oh, The storage capacity of a fully-connected committee machine,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 10 (1997).
[41] S. Sardi, R. Vardi, A. Goldental, Y. Tugendhaft, H. Uzan, I. Kanter, Dendritic learning as a
paradigm shift in brain learning, ACS chemical neuroscience, 9 (2018) 1230–1232.
[42] S. Hodassman, R. Vardi, Y. Tugendhaft, A. Goldental, I. Kanter, Efficient dendritic learning as
an alternative to synaptic plasticity hypothesis, Scientific Reports, 12 (2022) 6571.
[43] S. Sardi, R. Vardi, A. Goldental, A. Sheinin, H. Uzan, I. Kanter, Adaptive nodes enrich
nonlinear cooperative learning beyond traditional adaptation by links, Scientific reports, 8
(2018) 5100.
[44] R. Vardi, A. Goldental, S. Sardi, A. Sheinin, I. Kanter, Simultaneous multi-patch-clamp and
extracellular-array recordings: Single neuron reflects network activity, Sci Rep-Uk, 6 (2016)
36228.
[45] J. Lu, Full-text federated search in peer-to-peer networks, 2007.
[46] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V. Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi, P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf, M.
Funtowicz, Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing, in: Proceedings of the
2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing: system demonstrations,
2020, pp. 38–45.
[47] A. Paszke, Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.01703, (2019).
[48] J. Schmidhuber, Deep learning in neural networks: An overview, Neural networks, 61 (2015)
85–117.
[49] I. Loshchilov, F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.05101, (2017).
[50] C. Cortes, M. Mohri, A. Rostamizadeh, L2 regularization for learning kernels, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1205.2653, (2012).
[51] P. Goyal, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, P. Noordhuis, L. Wesolowski, A. Kyrola, A. Tulloch, Y. Jia, K. He,
Accurate, large minibatch sgd: Training imagenet in 1 hour, arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02677,
(2017).