An Interpretable Benchmark for Clickbait
Detection and Tactic Attribution
Lihi Nofar Tomer Portal Aviv Elbaz Alexander Apartsin Yehudit Aperstein
School of Computer Science, School of Computer Science, School of Computer Science, School of Computer Science, Intelligent Systems,
Faculty of Sciences Faculty of Sciences Faculty of Sciences Faculty of Sciences Afeka Academic College of Engineering
Holon Institute of Technology Holon Institute of Technology Holon Institute of Technology Holon Institute of Technology Tel Aviv Israel
strategies, such as exaggeration, curiosity gaps, emotional
The proliferation of clickbait headlines poses significant triggers, and misleading claims. This dataset enables a
challenges to the credibility of information and user trust in rigorous evaluation of models’ abilities to perform not only
digital media. While recent advances in machine learning have binary detection but also detailed strategy attribution.
improved the detection of manipulative content, the lack of In this work, we present a two-stage framework for
explainability limits their practical adoption. This paper presents
analyzing clickbait headlines. The first stage focuses on
a model for explainable clickbait detection that not only identifies
clickbait detection, while the second stage performs tactic
clickbait titles but also attributes them to specific linguistic
attribution, identifying the specific persuasive strategies used
manipulation strategies. We introduce a synthetic dataset
in each headline. This separation allows us not only to classify
generated by systematically augmenting real news headlines
using a predefined catalogue of clickbait strategies. This dataset a headline as clickbait or non-clickbait, but also to explain why
enables controlled experimentation and detailed analysis of a given headline is manipulative.
model behaviour. We present a two-stage framework for For the detection stage, we evaluate a range of models and
automatic clickbait analysis comprising detection and tactic prompting strategies. We include a fine-tuned BERT
attribution. In the first stage, we compare a fine-tuned BERT classifier, as well as state-of-the-art large language models
classifier with large language models (LLMs), specifically GPT-
(LLMs) such as GPT-4.0 and Gemini 2.4 Flash. These LLMs
4.0 and Gemini 2.4 Flash, under both zero-shot prompting and
are tested in both zero-shot settings, where the model receives
few-shot prompting enriched with illustrative clickbait headlines
only task instructions, and few-shot settings, where the prompt
and their associated persuasive tactics. In the second stage, a
is enriched with explicit examples of clickbait headlines and
dedicated BERT-based classifier predicts the specific clickbait
strategies present in each headline. This work advances the their associated tactics. This design allows us to examine how
development of transparent and trustworthy AI systems for providing tactic-aware exemplars influences detection
combating manipulative media content. We share the dataset performance.
with the research community at https://github.com/LLM- The attribution stage employs a dedicated BERT-based
HITCS25S/ClickbaitTacticsDetection classifier trained to predict the specific clickbait tactics present
in each headline. By separating detection from attribution, we
I. INTRODUCTION obtain interpretable outputs that highlight the particular
The widespread use of clickbait headlines in digital media persuasive strategies, such as curiosity-gap framing or
has become a pervasive challenge, undermining the credibility sensational adjectives, that drive engagement.
of information and exploiting user attention through By benchmarking these approaches, we provide valuable
manipulative linguistic techniques. While automated systems insights into the current state of explainable AI for clickbait
for detecting clickbait have improved in recent years, their detection and the models' abilities to perform fine-grained
focus has remained mainly on binary classification, simply linguistic attribution. This work contributes toward the
labelling content as clickbait or not. However, effective development of transparent and interpretable AI systems
mitigation of such content requires going beyond detection to capable of identifying not only manipulative content but also
understanding how and why certain headlines manipulate the techniques that drive it, supporting efforts to promote
readers. Specifically, it is crucial to evaluate whether current media integrity and user trust.
AI models can accurately recognize and distinguish the
diverse linguistic styles and persuasive strategies commonly II. LITERATURE REVIEW
employed in clickbait.
Clickbait refers to sensational or misleading headlines
In this study, we systematically benchmark the capabilities
crafted to provoke curiosity and entice readers to click. These
of modern AI models, both fine-tuned classifiers and large
headlines often promise information that the linked content
language models (LLMs), to detect clickbait content and
fails to deliver, degrading user trust. In recent years, research
distinguish among the underlying rhetorical strategies
on automatically detecting clickbait has grown, alongside a
employed in its construction. To support this analysis, we
rising emphasis on explainability, i.e., providing human-
generate a synthetic dataset by augmenting real news
interpretable reasons for why a headline is classified as
headlines with controlled applications of predefined clickbait
clickbait. Explainable detection is crucial for enhancing user
1
trust in AI systems and enabling users to understand the (POS) tags or phrase patterns. However, they require expert
linguistic strategies behind clickbait. knowledge for feature engineering and may struggle with the
Research on clickbait has benefited from several datasets of nuanced or context-dependent nature of modern clickbait.
headlines labelled as clickbait or non-clickbait. A foundational Modern clickbait detectors primarily utilize deep learning to
resource is the Clickbait Challenge 2017 dataset, compiled by learn features from data automatically. Recurrent neural
the Webis group, which contains thousands of social media networks (RNNs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
posts with associated clickbait scores. Since then, new datasets were among the first such models applied to clickbait
have extended to other languages and domains. For example, headlines, demonstrating improved performance by capturing
BanglaBait (Mahtab et al., 2023) introduced a Bangla- word sequence patterns that simple features missed. For
language headline corpus with clickbait labels, and RoCliCo example, Anand et al. (2017) used an LSTM-based model,
(Broscoteanu & Ionescu, 2023) provided a Romanian clickbait which showed gains by learning temporal word dependencies.
news headline corpus/ Researchers have also compiled In contrast, CNN models (e.g., Agrawal, 2016) captured
clickbait datasets from online news in Turkish (Akgün & keyword presence through n-gram filters. Later works
İnkaya, 2024) and Chinese (Liu et al., 2022), reflecting a trend incorporated attention mechanisms to focus on the most
toward multilingual clickbait detection. Many datasets focus salient words in a headline. Mishra et al. (2020) introduced an
on short text, such as headlines or social media post text, attention-based network that highlighted important trigger
sometimes accompanied by additional context, like article words (e.g., “will not believe” or “shocking”) to improve
snippets or images (for multi-modal clickbait). detection accuracy. Graph Neural Networks have also been
Clickbait is related to misinformation tasks, so we briefly explored; Liu et al. (2022) designed a Graph Attention
note some key datasets in this context. The FakeNewsNet Network that integrates semantic relations and syntactic
repository (Shu et al., 2018) aggregates news articles labelled structure (dependency links) of words.
as fake or real, along with their social context. It has been Their WeChat clickbait detector combined a BERT-based
utilized in explainable fake news studies, such as dEFEND text encoder with features such as part-of-speech tags to
(Shu et al., 2019). Short-form misinformation is addressed by capture both meaning and form, significantly enhancing
datasets such as LIAR, which labels political statements with performance on a dataset of Chinese social media headlines
truth values, and the SemEval-2019 Hyperpartisan News (Liu et al., 2022). In cases where social context or multiple
dataset, which categorizes news articles based on extreme modalities are available, deep models have been extended to
bias. Another relevant task is propaganda detection, where use them. Some approaches consider user behavior signals: for
datasets from 2019 to 2021 label spans of text that employ instance, metadata such as the number of clicks, comments, or
propaganda techniques. These serve as a fine-grained shares can hint at clickbaitness. However, relying on
benchmark for explainable classification, as the goal is to both propagation patterns means detecting clickbait only after it has
detect propaganda and highlight the specific words or phrases spread, which is often too late for mitigation. Thus, content-
(e.g., slogans, name-calling) responsible. In summary, a based methods are preferred for early detection. Multimodal
variety of datasets exist, enabling supervised learning for models combine textual analysis with image analysis when
clickbait and fake news detection across languages and posts include an enticing thumbnail image. Researchers have
providing testbeds for the development of explanation noted that inconsistency between a headline and its
methods. However, data scarcity remains a significant issue accompanying image (or article content) is a strong indicator
for low-resource languages and complex multimodal of clickbait. For example, a post showing an unrelated
scenarios, motivating the need for data augmentation and sensational image alongside a headline can be flagged. Yu et
synthetic data generation, as discussed later. al. (2024) propose a causal inference-based multimodal model
Early approaches (pre-2019) relied heavily on hand-crafted that disentangles intrinsic “bait” content from irrelevant
features to capture clickbait cues, such as unusual punctuation content introduced to fool detectors. By identifying latent
(e.g., excessive “!” or “?”), the presence of forward-reference factors representing the true deceptive intention, their model
words like “this” or “someone” (creating curiosity gaps), and became more robust to “disguised” clickbait, where creators
the use of superlatives or suspenseful language. Over the last insert innocuous text or images to evade detection. Overall,
five years, several studies have continued to explore feature- deep learning has enabled highly accurate clickbait classifiers
driven methods, partly to facilitate cross-language by learning complex feature combinations; yet these models
generalization. For example, Coste and Bufnea (2021) are often opaque, which drives the need for explainability
proposed a language-independent strategy for clickbait techniques.
detection, utilizing features such as punctuation patterns and The introduction of large pre-trained language models
stop-word ratios, which can be applied across languages. (PLMs), such as BERT and RoBERTa, led to further
Traditional classifiers, such as logistic regression, SVM, and improvements in clickbait detection between 2019 and 2022.
random forests, built on lexical and semantic features, have Fine-tuning such models on clickbait datasets leverages their
been evaluated on clickbait data as baselines for comparison. vast linguistic knowledge. Indurthi et al. (2020) demonstrated
Yadav and Bansal (2023) conducted a comparative study of that a fine-tuned BERT can predict not only binary clickbait
machine learning methods for clickbait, confirming that versus non-clickbait, but also a clickbait score (a graded
ensembles of lexical features can achieve reasonable accuracy, measure of clickbait strength) with high accuracy. Similarly,
though deep learning approaches generally outperform them. Yi et al. (2022) proposed a contrastive variational modelling
Overall, feature-based models help illuminate which linguistic approach built on PLMs, which treats clickbait detection as
attributes are most predictive, such as specific parts-of-speech learning distinct representations for clickbait versus normal
2
headlines. By using contrastive learning, their IJCAI 2022 natural-language explanations alongside predictions. Feature
model improved the discrimination of subtle cues. Fine-tuned Attribution (Post-hoc Explanations): A straightforward way to
transformers have become the standard baselines, often explain a clickbait classification is to identify which features
achieving F1-scores above 0.85 on English benchmarks and or words most influenced the model’s decision. General XAI
outperforming earlier RNN and CNN models. For low- tools, such as LIME and SHAP, have been applied in this
resource languages, multilingual PLMs (e.g., mBERT, XLM) context. For instance, Akgün and İnkaya (2024) used SHAP
have been fine-tuned when limited native data is available. For values to explain a machine learning classifier for Turkish
example, mBERT was used in some Turkish and Bangla clickbait. By inputting a headline into the model and
clickbait studies to leverage cross-lingual transfer. computing SHAP, they could rank the words or n-grams that
One challenge noted with PLM fine-tuning is the potential contributed most to a “clickbait” prediction (e.g., words like
gap between the pre-training objective and the clickbait “shocking” or “you will not believe” might get high positive
detection task, which can limit performance if sufficient task- attributions). Such post-hoc explanations help uncover
specific data is not present. To mitigate data scarcity, common patterns the model relies on. In their study, the SHAP
researchers have explored data augmentation techniques to analysis confirmed that specific sensational and curiosity-
enhance the availability of data. Yoon et al. (2019) injected inducing terms in Turkish were key factors in determining the
augmented samples (paraphrased or noised headlines) to results.
expand training data, while López-Sánchez et al. (2018) Similarly, one could apply LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) to
experimented with domain adaptation to transfer knowledge generate an explanation by perturbing parts of the headline
from news headlines to social media posts. These strategies and observing the impact on the prediction. While these
can help a fine-tuned model generalize better, though care methods do not alter the model's functionality, they provide a
must be taken to avoid introducing spurious patterns in transparent layer on top of an otherwise opaque model. A
augmented data. limitation, however, is that the reliability of these explanations
By 2023, the focus shifted to large language models depends on the stability of the model’s behavior under small
(LLMs), such as GPT-3 and ChatGPT, to determine whether changes; nonetheless, they are popular for quick insights.
they can detect clickbait without task-specific training. Wang Attention and Rationale Extraction: In neural network models
et al. (2023) evaluated GPT-3.5 (via ChatGPT) in zero-shot that use attention mechanisms or similar architectures, the
and few-shot settings on multiple English and Chinese model itself can produce internal attributions. Attention
datasets. They found that zero-shot LLM prompts (e.g., asking weights can highlight which words in a headline were most
ChatGPT, “Is this headline clickbait? Yes, or no?”) achieve attended to when predicting clickbait. For example, an
reasonable accuracy but do not yet match the accuracy of fine- attention-based LSTM might implicitly show that words like
tuned specialized models. In particular, contrary to human “Top 10” or “Guess what” in the title drove the classification.
intuition that a headline alone often suffices to judge clickbait, Caution is needed since attention weights are not always
GPT-based models struggled to do so reliably with just a faithful explanations, but they often align with intuitive
prompt. Few-shot prompting, which involves providing a few features. Some research goes further by building rationale
labelled examples in the prompt, improved performance but extraction directly into the model. Shu et al. (2019) in
still fell short of the state-of-the-art supervised methods. One dEFEND pioneered this approach for fake news, employing
insight from these experiments is that LLMs have strong dual attention (co-attention) over news content and user
multilingual abilities – ChatGPT’s performance was relatively comments to identify the top-k snippets (sentences and
consistent across English and Chinese clickbait, indicating that comments) that serve as explanations for why a news article is
it can generalize its understanding of enticing language to predicted to be fake. The output is not just a label but also a
some degree. set of highlighted sentences (e.g., a dubious claim in the article
Another line of work that integrates prompt learning for and a user comment debunking it) that explain the decision.
clickbait is Qin et al. (2022), as referenced in a Chinese social Notably, they quantitatively evaluated explanation quality by
media study, which introduced tailored prompt templates to checking how well the extracted sentences matched human-
stimulate the knowledge of PLMs for Weibo clickbait identified check-worthy sentences, using metrics like NDCG
detection. These prompt-based fine-tuning approaches, which and Precision.
fall between zero-shot and full fine-tuning, have shown This concept of extractive explanations has also influenced
promise in reducing the amount of training data required. In clickbait detection. While headlines are short, some
summary, off-the-shelf large language models (LLMs) today approaches utilize the linked article or social media discussion
provide a convenient baseline for clickbait detection, which is as additional context and identify inconsistent or revealing
suitable for rapid deployment in new domains; however, pieces of text to support the clickbait prediction. Another
specialized training or adaptation is still necessary to achieve example is Chien et al. (2022), who developed XFlag, an
optimal performance. As LLMs continue to improve, future explainable fake news model that provides reasons for a
systems may combine their broad knowledge with fine-tuning verdict on social media posts. Although details of XFlag are
tailored to clickbait for both high accuracy and explainability. beyond our scope, it integrates stance detection to flag
A central theme in recent literature is explainable AI (XAI) conflicting information between a post and known facts,
for content classification. Simply detecting clickbait or fake thereby explaining (Chien et al., 2022). In general, multi-
news is often not enough – platforms and end-users want to modal explanations are also explored: a system could
know why a piece of content was flagged. This has led to highlight an image (or portion of it) that does not match the
various approaches that provide attributions, highlights, or
3
headline, explaining that “the image is unrelated to the claim.” punctuation (“!!!”) are signals. A study by Flórez-Vivar and
Such capabilities remain an active area of research. Zaharía (2022) categorized exaggeration tactics, including
By 2023–2024, an emerging trend is to leverage large neologisms, intensifiers (e.g., “very best”, “absolutely
language models themselves to generate explanations for stunning”), and the use of all-caps or exclamation marks. Such
decisions. Huang et al. (2024) (FakeGPT) treated ChatGPT embellishments aim to make the content seem more
not only as a detector but also as an explainer for fake news. extraordinary than it is. Recent psychological studies (e.g.,
They prompted ChatGPT to justify its classification of news as Scott, 2021) note that these emotional triggers exploit the
fake or real, and extracted common rationale patterns from reader’s instinct for novel or extreme information (related to
these explanations. Interestingly, by analyzing ChatGPT’s relevance theory and information gap theory in
free-text explanations for multiple instances, they identified communication)
nine key features characteristic of fake news, including Clickbait frequently addresses the reader directly or uses a
references to a lack of credible sources and the presence of conversational tone, unlike traditional news headlines. This
clickbait language. This demonstrates a novel use of LLMs: can include second-person pronouns (“you”), imperatives
the model’s explanation can be parsed to identify which (“watch this now”), or colloquial expressions. Using personal
factors (like “the headline makes an exaggerated claim” or pronouns and even slang can create a sense of intimacy or
“the content contradicts known facts”) are driving the urgency. For example, “This hack will change your life”
decision. Those factors can then be evaluated across datasets directly appeals to you, the reader. Flórez-Vivar & Zaharía
to see how frequently they occur in fake vs real news. This (2022) list personal deixis and imperatives as a key category,
kind of approach bridges human-understandable concepts and along with typographic choices like adding parentheticals or
model decisions. Another work used a “reason-aware” ellipses to create a dramatic pause. Such techniques break the
prompting technique, where the LLM is asked to consider formal tone of standard journalism, signaling that the
specific potential reasons before answering, which improved headline’s goal is engagement over information.
detection consistency. Legitimate headlines often provide specific information,
For clickbait, one could envision ChatGPT explaining, such as names, dates, and facts, whereas clickbait tends to lean
“This headline is likely clickbait because it withholds key toward ambiguity to create intrigue. For example, a non-
information (who, what, or where) to invoke curiosity.” Such clickbait headline might be, “Mayor John Doe Resigns Amid
explanations, if accurate, are beneficial for end-users and Scandal,” while a clickbait version would be “You will Never
content moderators. The downside is that LLM-generated Guess Who Just Resigned in Disgrace.” The latter omits the
explanations are not guaranteed to reflect the model's internal key detail, the name, to pique curiosity. Studies have also
reasoning accurately; they can sound plausible but be noted that clickbait may misuse credibility markers (like
incorrect. Hence, there is interest in evaluating explanation “Study shows...” without linking to a study) or include
quality – e.g., measuring whether the provided reason is misleading frames. In some cases, clickbait borders on false or
truthful and aligns with known evidence, or conducting user deceptive content – indeed, a subset of clickbait headlines is
studies to determine whether the explanation increases essentially fake news with a sensational wrapper. Pasternack
understanding and trust. Evaluation of Attribution: Regardless (2019) coined the term “deceptive clickbait” for headlines that
of the method, evaluating explainability is a challenging task. not only entice but also outright mislead about the content.
Some objective metrics have been used, like fidelity (does These require detection techniques that overlap with those
removing the highlighted features significantly reduce the used for fake news verification to verify whether claims align
model’s confidence?) or precision@k for rationale retrieval with reality.
(as in dEFEND, checking if the top-k highlighted sentences Related to clickbait, misinformation posts often employ
indeed contain misinformation cues). persuasion strategies. For instance, propaganda pieces might
A crucial aspect of explainable clickbait detection is use loaded language or anecdotal leads to capture readers'
understanding the persuasive linguistic strategies that attention. A 2023 study on misinformation in social media
differentiate clickbait from normal headlines. Researchers in (Chen et al., 2023) found that posts with misleading intent
communications and computational linguistics have identified often employ similar tactics to clickbait, including emotional
a variety of recurring patterns in clickbait headlines. Clickbait appeal, storytelling (utilizing anecdotes to evoke empathy),
often withholds key details, using phrases like “You will not and logical fallacies, to sway public opinion. Identifying these
believe…” or “This [person/thing] …” to spark curiosity. strategies can help explain why a piece of content was flagged,
Blom and Hansen (2015) termed this forward-reference, as the for example, “the text uses a personal story laced with
headline refers to something (e.g., “this actress”) without exaggerated claims, indicative of a persuasive misinformation
naming it, forcing the reader to click for details. Recent tactic.”
analyses confirm that unanswered questions in headlines and Recent literature surveys confirm the importance of these
deictic references (like “here” or “this”) are standard clickbait linguistic features. Jácobo-Morales & Marino-Jiménez (2024)
devices. For instance, headlines posed as open questions compiled 165 studies and identified 11 key properties of
(“Can you guess what happened next?”) or listicles (“10 clickbait, including provoking curiosity, employing a
Secrets to...”) inherently promise that the complete sensational or informal style, being misleading or of low
information is inside, thus baiting the click. quality, and prioritizing click maximization. Likewise, Lu &
Many clickbait headlines use exaggeration, hyperbole, or Shen (2023) identified humor, logical puzzles, storytelling,
sensational language to create excitement or alarm. Words like and other strategies as common elements in clickbait,
“insane”, “shocking”, “heartbreaking”, etc., or excessive particularly in video titles. The implication for detection
4
models is that incorporating knowledge of these patterns can sourcing and formalizing clickbait creation tactics, (2)
enhance the model's explainability. Some detection systems generating a synthetic dataset through controlled headline
explicitly check for the presence of such phrases or structures augmentation, and (3) implementing and evaluating model
as features (e.g., a binary feature for “does the headline pose a pipelines for detection and attribution.
question?”). When an explainable model flags a headline, it We begin by constructing a comprehensive catalogue of
might output which pattern was detected – for example, clickbait creation strategies using a hybrid approach. An AI-
“classified as clickbait due to list-based structure and assisted analysis is performed on multiple sources, including
curiosity-provoking phrasing.” This not only helps end-users prior academic research in media psychology, computational
but also assists content creators in avoiding unintentional linguistics, journalism studies, and large-scale headline
clickbait styles if desired. corpora. This process identifies recurring persuasive patterns
Addressing data limitations has been a recurring theme in and linguistic manipulations commonly used to increase
recent years, particularly for training models that can be engagement.
effectively explained and generalized. Researchers have
turned to synthetic data generation to supplement real datasets.
Tactic Description
One approach has been using LLMs to generate additional
Curiosity Gap Withholding key information to provoke curiosity.
examples of fake news or clickbait. Huang et al. (2024)
demonstrated this by prompting ChatGPT to produce fake Exaggeration Overstating claims to increase perceived
and Hyperbole importance.
news articles in various styles.
Emotional Using emotionally charged language to elicit strong
They demonstrated, through human evaluation, that the
Triggers reactions.
samples generated were of high quality and diversity,
Framing ordinary events as shocking or
effectively augmenting the training data for detectors. Sensationalism
extraordinary.
Similarly, for clickbait, one can generate artificial clickbait
Lists and Utilizing list structures or superlatives can help
headlines by applying known transformation rules, such as Superlatives attract attention.
rephrasing a typical headline as a question or adding a teaser Ambiguous
Using vague entities to create intrigue.
phrase. Such synthetic clickbait can be helpful in scenarios References
where we have an abundance of non-clickbait samples but a Direct Appeals Addressing the reader directly.
scarcity of clickbait examples. Another sophisticated
Unfinished
technique is the use of adversarial methods to generate data. Narratives Implies a story but leaves out the conclusion.
Mahtab et al. (2023) in their BanglaBait work employed a Unexpected
Juxtaposing unrelated concepts to spark curiosity.
semi-supervised adversarial approach, utilizing a generative Associations
model to produce candidate clickbait headlines from unlabeled Provocative Using open or rhetorical questions to engage the
data and an adversarial setup to refine the classifier gradually. Questions reader.
This process generated additional training points in low- Table 1: Common Clickbait Tactics
resource settings, improving the model without requiring
manual annotation. To create a rich and labelled dataset for model training and
Broscoteanu and Ionescu (2023) applied contrastive evaluation, we adopt a controlled synthetic data generation
learning to the Romanian clickbait corpus, aiming to make process based on real-world news headlines. A large corpus of
more effective use of the limited data. This approach verified, non-clickbait news headlines is sampled from a
essentially involves learning from pairs of clickbait versus publicly available news headline dataset [37], ensuring broad
non-clickbait examples by adjusting representations to pull coverage of topics and writing styles. For each sampled
them closer together or apart as needed. In multimodal headline, we generate multiple clickbait variants by applying
misinformation detection, Zeng et al. (2024) addressed the one or more tactics from the predefined catalogue. We employ
lack of image-text training data by learning from synthetic the GPT-4o model for this task, using carefully crafted
multimodal misinformation. They note that large, curated real- prompts that specify the tactic(s) to apply. For example, a
world fact-checking sets, such as MediaEval (with only prompt might instruct the model to rewrite a headline using
~10,000 items), are dwarfed by synthetic sets, like the "Curiosity Gap" and "Exaggeration" tactics.
NewsCLIPings (with over 1 million generated image-caption
pairs). By carefully selecting and weighting synthetic samples Tactics
Source Item Augmented Item
to mimic the distribution of real data, they enhanced the Used
performance of a 13-billion-parameter model in detecting real Haiti PM resigns as Power Shifts in Haiti as
Unfinished
fake news, even outperforming GPT-4 Vision on some transitional council is Narrative Transitional Council Sworn
sworn in In—But the Next Move?
benchmarks. This highlights that synthetic data, when used
Meta AI spending Why Did Meta’s Huge AI
wisely, can enhance detection systems. Curiosity
plans cause share Bet Send Its Stock Tumbling
Gap
price slump Overnight?
III. METHODOLOGY
Table 2: Original and clickbait augmented news title
This study employs a structured methodology designed to examples
facilitate both accurate clickbait detection and explainable
attribution of the linguistic strategies employed in clickbait Each generated clickbait headline is annotated with the
creation. The methodology consists of three main stages: (1) exact set of tactics used during its creation. This ensures that
5
the resulting dataset supports both binary clickbait detection Gemini 2.5 Few Shots 0.81 0.40 0.55 0.46
and multi-label classification for tactic attribution. The final Gemini 2.5 Zero-shot 0.83 0.38 0.60 0.47
dataset includes the original headlines, their clickbait variants, Table 3: Clickbait Detection Performance
and corresponding tactic labels, enabling supervised learning
for both detection and explainability. Tactic attribution was evaluated as a multi-label
To examine the balance between accuracy, interpretability, classification task, reporting overall Precision, Recall, and F1-
and computational cost, we evaluate a set of two-stage score to capture the accuracy of identifying the persuasive
pipelines for clickbait detection and tactic attribution. In every strategies present in each headline (Table 4).
configuration, the first stage performs headline detection, and
the second stage provides tactic attribution. However, the
choice of models and prompting strategies varies to illuminate
the trade-offs between specialized training and the use of large
pre-trained language models.
In the detection stage, we compare several alternatives. The
first employs a fine-tuned BERT classifier, representing a
fully supervised baseline. The remaining configurations rely
on large language models, specifically GPT-4.0 and Gemini
2.5 Flash, each tested under both zero-shot and few-shot
prompting conditions. This setup allows us to assess how
these state-of-the-art LLMs perform clickbait detection
without task-specific fine-tuning and how tactic-aware few-
Table 4: Attribution Performance
shot exemplars affect their accuracy. We also examine a
hybrid configuration that keeps the BERT detector but
introduces few-shot prompting to GPT-4.0 for downstream V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
attribution, measuring the impact of minimal tactic-annotated This study introduced an explainable framework for
examples on performance. clickbait detection that moves beyond simple classification to
The attribution stage is handled by a dedicated BERT-based identify the specific linguistic strategies used to attract readers.
multi-label classifier whenever attribution is not produced We compiled a catalogue of ten common clickbait tactics and
directly by the LLM. This component predicts the specific created a synthetic dataset through controlled augmentation
persuasive strategies, such as curiosity gaps or sensational with GPT-4.0, enabling precise evaluation of both detection
framing, present in each headline. When few-shot prompting and tactic attribution.
is applied, both GPT-4.0 and Gemini 2.5 Flash receive labeled Our experiments compared two-stage pipelines built on
exemplars that illustrate clickbait titles together with their fine-tuned BERT models and on large language models (GPT-
associated tactics, enabling direct tactic prediction alongside 4.0 and Gemini 2.5 Flash), evaluated with both zero-shot and
detection. few-shot prompting. The results highlight clear trade-offs:
Across all configurations, including those where GPT-4.0 fine-tuned models deliver the highest precision, recall, and F1-
and Gemini 2.5 Flash serve as detectors with both zero-shot scores for detection. In contrast, large language models show
and few-shot prompting, we measure detection accuracy, strong potential for direct attribution and perform reasonably
attribution precision, and the clarity of the generated well without task-specific training, especially when tactic-
explanations, with particular attention to the system’s ability aware few-shot examples are provided. These findings
to distinguish overlapping persuasive techniques. underscore the balance between accuracy, explainability, and
deployment complexity when integrating large pre-trained
IV. RESULTS models.
Future work will broaden the dataset to include multimodal
The proposed pipelines were evaluated using
signals such as images and social context to mirror real-world
precision, recall, and F1-score to measure both clickbait
use better. We plan to explore causal inference techniques to
detection and tactic attribution. Evaluation was conducted at
separate overlapping persuasive tactics and to enhance
two levels. Table 3 reports the detection performance of all
attribution precision. Extending the approach to additional
models. A fine-tuned BERT classifier achieved the highest
languages and low-resource settings remains a priority, along
scores, with a precision of 0.89, a recall of 0.93, and an F1-
with incorporating human-in-the-loop evaluation to gauge the
score of 0.91. Large language models showed lower absolute
clarity and usefulness of model explanations for moderators
performance but improved when tactic-aware few-shot
and end-users. Finally, we aim to investigate conversational
prompts were used. GPT-4.0 increased its F1-score from 0.40
AI tools that can not only detect and explain clickbait but also
in zero-shot mode to 0.43 in few-shot mode, while Gemini 2.5
offer interactive guidance to help content creators avoid
Flash improved from 0.46 to 0.47 under the same setting.
manipulative writing practices.
F1-
Detection Model Accuracy Precision Recall Score REFERENCES
Fine-tuned BERT 0.91 0.89 0.93 0.91 [1] Adrian, A. F. H. N., Handradika, N. N., Prasojo, A. E., Gunawan, A. A. S.,
GPT-4o Zero-Shot 0.73 0.31 0.55 0.40 & Setiawan, K. E. (2024). Clickbait detection on online news headlines using
GPT-4o Few-Shot 0.84 0.36 0.53 0.43 naïve Bayes and LSTM. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE International
6
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Mechatronics Systems (AIMS) (pp. the 2024 11th International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies
1–6). IEEE and Optimization (ICRITO) (pp. 1–5). IEEE.
[2] Akın, A. A., & Akın, M. D. (2007). Zemberek: An open-source NLP [23] Rao, S., Mehta, S., Kulkarni, S., Dalvi, H., Katre, N., & Narvekar, M.
framework for Turkic languages. Structure, 10, 1–5. (2022). A study of LIME and SHAP model explainers for autonomous disease
[3] Arfat, Y., & Tista, S. C. (2024). Bangla misleading clickbait detection predictions. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE Bombay Section Signature
using an ensemble learning approach. In Proceedings of the 2024 6th Conference (IBSSC) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Information & [24] Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S., & Guestrin, C. (2016). “Why should I trust
Communication Technology (ICEEICT) (pp. 184–189). IEEE. you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd
[4] Benavoli, A., Corani, G., & Mangili, F. (2016). Should we really use post- ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
hoc tests based on mean-ranks? Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1), Mining (KDD ’16) (pp. 1135–1144). ACM.
152–161. [25] Sarker, I. H. (2021). Machine learning: Algorithms, real-world
[5] Biyani, P., Tsioutsiouliklis, K., & Blackmer, J. (2016). “8 amazing secrets applications, and research directions. SN Computer Science, 2(3),
for getting more clicks”: Detecting clickbaits in news streams using article [26] Sharma, V., & Midhunchakkaravarthy, D. (2023). XGBoost classification
informality. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence of XAI-based LIME and SHAP for detecting dementia in young adults. In
(Vol. 30, No. 1). AAAI Press. Proceedings of the 2023 14th International Conference on Computer,
[6] Broscoteanu, D. M., & Ionescu, R. T. (2023). A novel contrastive learning Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
method for clickbait detection on RoCliCo: A Romanian clickbait corpus of [27] Shu, K., Cui, L., Wang, S., Lee, D., & Liu, H. (2019). DEFEND:
news articles. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Explainable fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD
EMNLP 2023, 9547–9555. International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD ’19)
[7] Chakraborty, A., Paranjape, B., Kakarla, S., & Ganguly, N. (2016). Stop (pp. 395–405). ACM.
clickbait: Detecting and preventing clickbaits in online news media. In [28] Sparck Jones, K. (1972). A statistical interpretation of term specificity
Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in and its application in retrieval. Journal of Documentation, 28(1), 11–21.
Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM) (pp. 9–16). IEEE. [29] Turan, T., Küçüksille, E., & Alagöz, N. K. (2023). Prediction of Turkish
[8] Chien, S. Y., Yang, C. J., & Yu, F. (2022). XFlag: Explainable fake news Constitutional Court decisions with explainable artificial intelligence. Bilge
detection model on social media. International Journal of Human–Computer International Journal of Science and Technology Research, 7(2), 128–141.
Interaction, 38(18–20), 1808–1827. [30] Turkish News Title 20000+ Clickbait Classified [Data set]. (2024).
[9] Chowanda, A., Nadia, N., & Kolbe, L. M. M. (2023). Identifying clickbait Kaggle. Retrieved August 9, 2024,
in online news using deep learning. Bulletin of Electrical Engineering and [31] Van den Broeck, G., Lykov, A., Schleich, M., & Suciu, D. (2022). On the
Informatics, 12(3), 1755–1761. tractability of SHAP explanations. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
[10] Coste, C. I., Bufnea, D., & Niculescu, V. (2020). A new language- 74, 851–886.
independent strategy for clickbait detection. In Proceedings of the 2020 [32] We Are Social. (2023). Digital 2023 global overview report.
International Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer [33] Yadav, K. K., & Bansal, N. (2023). A comparative study on clickbait
Networks (SoftCOM) (pp. 1–6). IEEE. detection using machine learning based methods. In Proceedings of the 2023
[11] Domingos, P. (2012). A few useful things to know about machine International Conference on Disruptive Technologies (ICDT) (pp. 661–665).
learning. Communications of the ACM, 55(10), 78–87. IEEE.
[12] Friedman, M. (1937). The use of ranks to avoid the assumption of [34] Yang, W., Wei, Y., Wei, H., Chen, Y., Huang, G., Li, X., & Kang, B.
normality implicit in the analysis of variance. Journal of the American (2023). Survey on explainable AI: From approaches, limitations, and
Statistical Association, 32(200), 675–701. applications aspects. Human-Centric Intelligent Systems, 3(3), 161–188.
[13] Genç, Ş. (2021). Turkish clickbait detection in social media via machine [35] Zhou, M., Xu, W., Zhang, W., & Jiang, Q. (2022). Leverage knowledge
learning algorithms (Master’s thesis, Middle East Technical University, graph and GCN for fine-grained-level clickbait detection. World Wide Web,
Ankara, Turkey). 25(3), 1243–1258.
[14] Kiran, A., & Vasumathi, D. (2020). Data mining: Min–max [36] Zuhroh, N. A., & Rakhmawati, N. A. (2022). Clickbait detection: A
normalization-based data perturbation technique for privacy preservation. In literature review of the methods used. Register: Jurnal Ilmiah Teknologi
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Computational Sistem Informasi, 6(1), 1–10
Intelligence and Informatics (ICCII 2018) (pp. 723–734). Springer. [37] D. Castilo, News Headlines 2024, Kaggle dataset
[15] Kostiantyn, S. B., Zaharakis, I., & Pintelas, P. (2007). Supervised
machine learning: A review of classification techniques. In Emerging
Artificial Intelligence Applications in Computer Engineering (Vol. 160, pp. 3–
24). IOS Press.
[16] Liu, T., Yu, K., Wang, L., Zhang, X., Zhou, H., & Wu, X. (2022).
Clickbait detection on WeChat: A deep model integrating semantic and
syntactic information. Knowledge-Based Systems, 245, 108605.
[17] Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S. I. (2017). A unified approach to interpreting
model predictions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
4765–4774.
[18] Mahtab, M. M., Haque, M., Hasan, M., & Sadeque, F. (2023).
BanglaBait: Semi-supervised adversarial approach for clickbait detection on a
Bangla clickbait dataset. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference
on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP 2023) (pp.
748–758). INCOMA.
[19] Pérez-Landa, G. I., Loyola-González, O., & Medina-Pérez, M. A. (2021).
An explainable artificial intelligence model for detecting xenophobic tweets.
Applied Sciences, 11(22), 10801.
[20] Potthast, M., Köpsel, S., Stein, B., & Hagen, M. (2016). Clickbait
detection. In Advances in Information Retrieval: Proceedings of the 38th
European Conference on IR Research (ECIR 2016) (pp. 810–817). Springer.
[21] Powers, D. M. (2011). Evaluation: From precision, recall, and F-measure
to ROC, informedness, markedness, and correlation. International Journal of
Machine Learning Technology, 2(1), 37–63.
[22] Raj, R., Sharma, C., Uttara, R., & Animon, C. R. (2024). A literature
review on clickbait detection techniques for social media. In Proceedings of
7