Explicit Grammar–Semantic Feature Fusion for
Robust Cross-Domain Text Classification
Azrin Sultana (25-93678-1@student.aiub.edu)1 and Firoz Ahmed
(fahmed@aiub.edu)1,*
1Department of Computer Science, American International
University-Bangladesh, Dhaka-1229, Bangladesh
*Corresponding author: fahmed@aiub.edu
February 25, 2026
1 Abstract
Natural Language Processing (NLP) enables computers to understand human
languageandanalyzeandclassifytextefficientlybyprocessingdeep-levelgram-
matical and semantic features. Existing models capture features either by
learning from large corpora with transformer models, which are computation-
allyintensiveandunsuitableforresource-constrainedenvironments,orbyusing
lightweight shallow models. Previous studies overlooked the importance of in-
corporating comprehensive grammatical rules alongside semantic information
to build a robust, lightweight classification model without resorting to full-
parameterized transformer models or heavy deep learning architectures. To
address this gap, we proposed a novel Grammar-Aware Feature Engineering
framework for cross-domain text analysis. The novelty of our approach lies in
its explicit encoding of sentence-level grammatical structure—including syntac-
tic composition, phrase patterns, and complexity indicators—into a compact
grammarvector, whichisthenfusedwithfrozencontextualembeddings. These
heterogeneous elements unified a single representation that captures both the
structural and semantic characteristics of the text. Deep learning models such
as Deep Belief Network (DBN), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), BiLSTM,
and transformer-based BERT and XLNET were used to train and evaluate the
model, with the number of epochs varied. Based on experimental results, the
unified feature representation model captures both the semantic and structural
propertiesoftext,outperformingbaselinemodelsby2%-15%,enablingmoreef-
fectivelearningacrossheterogeneousdomains. Unlikepriorsyntax-awaretrans-
former models that inject grammatical structure through additional attention
layers, tree encoders, or full fine-tuning, the proposed framework treats gram-
1
6202
beF
42
]LC.sc[
1v94702.2062:viXra
mar as an explicit inductive bias rather than a learnable module resulting in a
very lightweight model that delivers better performance on edge devices.
2 Introduction
NaturalLanguageProcessing(NLP)processestextualdata,whichenablescom-
puterstounderstandandcommunicateinhumanlanguage. Itenablesmachines
torecognize,understand,andgeneratetextandspeechbycombiningrule-based
modelling of human language with statistical and machine learning models. [1]
[2]. ThedemandfortheNLPmarketisincreasingsignificantly,projectedtoap-
proximately15.1%from2023to2030[3]. Overthepast20years,computational
linguisticshasgrownintobothascientificfieldandapracticaltechnology. This
growth is attributed to the increasing demand for NLP solutions across vari-
ous industries and applications, including healthcare, finance, e-commerce, and
customer service [4].
NLP tasks primarily involve syntactic and semantic analysis of the text [5].
It is used for a wide range of language-related tasks, including answering ques-
tions,classifyingtext,andconversingwithusers. Itstypicalapplicationsinclude
sentiment analysis of text, primarily reviews; spam detection in email analysis;
and token classification, also referred to as named entity recognition (NER),
which labels each word in a sentence [6]. Question answering of an automatic
chatbot system for product queries, where the model examines the question’s
context and identifies the relevant information in the passage to provide an
accurate answer [7]. Currently, NLP is widely used for translation generation
from one language to another [8] [9]. The earliest applications of NLP were
simpleif-thendecisionsthatrequiredpreprogrammedrulestoperformtheNLP
task. They can provide answers only in response to specific prompts because
rule-basedNLPlacksmachine-learningorAIcapabilities. StatisticalNLPauto-
maticallyextracts,classifies,andlabelselementsoftextandassignsastatistical
likelihood to each possible meaning of those elements. This relies on machine
learning to enable sophisticated analysis of linguistic phenomena [10]. Statisti-
calNLPintroducedtheessentialtechniqueofmappinglanguageelements, such
as words and grammatical rules, to vector representations, enabling language
modelingusingmathematicalmethods,includingregressionandMarkovmodels
[11].
Modelperformancelargelydependsonthequalityofdatausedduringtrain-
ing. Feature engineering is a crucial preprocessing technique for NLP tasks, as
machines cannot process raw text. Feature representation transforms raw text
into a structured representation that a machine can use to extract meaningful
information [12] [13]. Traditional NLP feature engineering techniques, such as
bag-of-words, treat an unordered collection of words, disregarding word order
and most syntactic or grammatical information [14] [15]. Another statistical
method is TF-IDF, which quantifies how important a word is to a document
relativetoalargercorpus[16]. Withadvancesindeeplearning,semanticfeature
representations such as Word2Vec [17], GloVe [18], and FastText [19] embed-
2
dings have become widely used. Given a sequence of words in a sentence, the
Word2Vec model takes a fixed number of context words as input, and each
is represented as an embedding via a shared embedding layer. In contrast,
GloVe generates dense vector representations by analyzing their co-occurrence
patterns in a corpus. FastText can capture the semantic meaning of morpho-
logically related words, even for out-of-vocabulary words or rare words, making
it particularly useful for handling languages with rich morphology or for tasks
whereout-of-vocabularywordsarecommon[19]. Amongthesefeatureselection
methods, traditional approaches ignore word order, grammar, and context and
are sensitive to domain-specific vocabulary. Transformer-based models leverage
dense contextual embeddings to achieve state-of-the-art performance across a
variety of tasks. However, while these models capture semantic and syntac-
tic relationships, they often do so implicitly within their embedding space and
are less robust across domains with divergent linguistic structures [20]. Addi-
tionally, to obtain semantic and synthetic information from text, transformer
models need to be trained with parameter counts ranging from millions to hun-
dreds of billions. Training and even inference require massive matrix multipli-
cations, which are energy-intensive on GPUs/TPUs, making it difficult to run
theseheavymodelsonresource-limiteddevices. Mostsyntax-awaretransformer
models incorporate syntax through additional attention heads, tree encoders,
or fine-tuning, which increases parameter count and training cost. This con-
tradicts deployment requirements for low-resource and edge environments [21].
Therefore, critical grammatical signals—such as explicit syntactic dependen-
cies, phrase-level patterns, and sentence complexity—may be underutilized or
obscured during downstream learning.
The core limitation of existing syntax-aware transformer architectures is
that grammatical structure is introduced through additional trainable compo-
nents, increasing model capacity and computational cost while tightly coupling
syntax learning to domain-specific lexical statistics. In contrast, this work pro-
posesafundamentallydifferentparadigm: grammarisintroducedasanexplicit
inductivebiasthatconstrainsrepresentationlearningwithoutmodifyingorfine-
tuning the transformer architecture. By freezing the transformer backbone and
injectingalow-dimensionalgrammarvectorattherepresentationlevel,thepro-
posed framework restricts the hypothesis space toward linguistically plausible
configurations, improving domain robustness while preserving model efficiency.
Based on these limitations, we proposed a novel, extensive, a grammar-based
feature selection technique, which integrates a rich set of grammar-driven rules
to understand the text features in depth with syntactic and structural insights,
includingPOS,syntacticdependencyrelations,phrasestructurepatterns,verb-
adverbratio, structureofthesentence, andcomplexsentenceindicatorstocap-
ture the underlying grammatical style and discourse flow of each document. To
incorporate contextual information, the extracted sentence-level grammar fea-
tures are fused with token-level embeddings, thereby giving each token access
to the global sentence context. Through this hybrid feature design, the model
learnsdomain-invariantgrammaticalregularities, improvingbothinterpretabil-
ity and robustness in cross-domain classification tasks.
3
The main contribution of our proposed model:
• Designingagrammar-basedfeaturevectorwithtextembeddingforaclas-
sification task
• Integrated 11 different grammar rules for extracting grammar-based fea-
tures.
• extensive experiments on both document-level classification and token-
level NER tasks, showing consistent performance gains across deep learn-
ing and transformer-based models while maintaining a lightweight archi-
tecture.
• EvaluateandcomparetheeffectivenessofdeeplearningLSTM,BiLSTM,
DBN,andtransformer-basedmodels,includingBERT,DistilBERT,using
these combined grammar and contextual feature vectors.
• To assess model performance in both binary and multi-class settings, we
used accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.
3 Literature Review
Thepurposeoftextunderstandingistoenablemachinestoaccuratelyinterpret
human language. Therefore, it is necessary to represent text as efficient feature
vectorsusingextensivegrammaticalandtransformer-basedlearningsothatthe
machinecanlearncomplexpatterns. Recentresearchongrammar-basedfeature
engineering for NLP tasks remains limited.
Existingwork,Mohassebetal.[22],exploredagrammar-based[22],explored
a grammar-based question-answer classification framework. Three experimen-
tal settingswere considered: baselineclassification, class-balanced classification
via SMOTE, and binary classification. On the contrary, in [23], a new firefly
algorithm-based feature selection method is proposed. To validate this tech-
nique, a Support Vector Machine classifier is used, along with three evalua-
tion metrics: precision, recall, and F1-score. Furthermore, experiments on the
OSAC real dataset, along with comparisons with state-of-the-art methods, are
conducted. POS tagging has been widely used in deep learning to extract fea-
turesfromtext;recentresearchismodifyingPOSmodelswithnewalgorithmsto
makethesystemmorerobustandlesserror-prone. [24]usedMarkovmodelsand
the Viterbi algorithm with POS. In contrast, Han et al. [25] improved the POS
tagging model for imperative sentences, which differ in syntax, and trained the
POS tagger on a new corpus. With this technique, tagging precision increased
by27%. Thelexicalambiguityisresolvedbyextractinglocalcontextualknowl-
edge from attached images to help users better understand the process. POS
taggingisalsousedforThaiwh-questionclassificationintext,employingfeature
selection and word embedding techniques, as in Chotirat et al. [26]. conducted
several experiments to evaluate the performance of the proposed methodol-
ogy using two different datasets (the TREC-6 dataset and the Thai sentence
4
dataset), including Unigram, Unigram+Bigram, and Unigram+Trigram. POS
tagging,withrule-baseddatapreprocessingproposedbyLietal. [27]. Bymask-
ing a portion of the POS tags and using self-attention, the model can leverage
bidirectional context. The proposed approach combines rule-based methods
with deep learning, which is beneficial for POS tagging research. Experiments
on the GMB dataset for POS tagging achieved a whole-sentence accuracy of
76.04%.Kou et al. [28] proposed a model with a multi-criteria decision system-
based evaluation method to assess feature selection methods’ performance for
classification tasks with small numbers of samples. Feature selection methods
such as bag-of-words and TF-IDF with transformer models are a new research
direction. The authors use this to train the model to learn feature embeddings
withgreateraccuracy. Chaudharyetal. [29]proposedanarchitecturewithTF-
IDF feature extraction and GPT-2 integration, yielding a 4.6% improvement in
precision and recall. A binary sentiment classification of user reviews in Brazil-
ian Portuguese is proposed in [30] that provides a comprehensive experimental
study of embedding approaches. This study includes classical Bag-of-Words
to state-of-the-art Transformer-based models, evaluated with five open-source
databases. Tounderstandshorttexts,Lietal. [31]proposedacombinedmethod
that combines knowledge-based conceptualization with a transformer encoder.
For each term in a brief text, obtain its concept base based on cooccurrence
terms and concepts, construct a convolutional neural network to capture lo-
cal context information, and introduce the subnetwork structure based on a
transformer embedding encoder and embed these into a low-dimensional vector
spacetoobtainmoreattentionfromtheseconceptsbasedonatransformerwith
a precision of 81%.
In summary, current grammar-based feature selection for textual data ap-
proaches have demonstrated potential but remain fragmented, rule-bound, and
domain-specific. In[22],[23]appliedaquestionansweringmodel; however, their
modelsarelimitedtopredefinedgrammarrulesbasedonquestionanswerswith-
outconsideringthecontextualinformation. WhereastheViterbialgorithm,ap-
plied to sentiment analysis using a hidden Markov model [24], is limited to a
singledataset. Thereisaneedtodevelopageneralizablegrammar-awarefeature
engineering framework that can adapt to multiple domains and languages. Our
proposed study can advance the field by unifying grammatical multiple rules,
complex structures such as phrasal verbs, which are overlooked by almost all
studies,intoalearnablegrammarembeddinglayer,applyingcross-domainclas-
sification experiments, mainly sentiment, topic modeling, and question classifi-
cation,andintroducinggrammar-awarebalancinganddimensionalityreduction
techniques with transformer embedding. Additionally, our proposed system in-
tegratestextembeddingswithgrammaticalfeaturesviaconcatenation,enabling
themodeltojointlycapturesyntacticstructureandsemanticrepresentationfor
more effective training and representation learning. To the best of our knowl-
edge,thisisthefirstapproachtocombinein-depthgrammaticalstructureswith
contextual text embeddings into a unified feature representation, resulting in a
more informative and robust modeling framework.
5
4 Methodology
This chapter describes the process adopted to design and experiment with the
proposed grammar-based feature identification.
4.1 Dataset description
Forthisstudy,weusedtwodomain-specificdatasetstoevaluatetheeffectiveness
of the proposed classification model and to capture deeper linguistic informa-
tion using grammar-based features. Using two datasets allows us to assess the
generality and robustness of grammar-based features across diverse linguistic
settings and natural language processing (NLP) tasks, including classification,
sentimentanalysis,andnamedentityrecognition. Fortheclassificationtask,the
emailclassificationdataset[32]isused. Theclassificationdatasethas52,062in-
stances. Initially, the dataset contains multiple columns; however, for our task,
we retained only the text and label attributes. The dataset consisted of 52,062
messages, of which 72.47% (37729) were categorized as “not spam” and 14,333
(27.53%) were labeled as ”spam”, as depicted in Figure 1. From the figure 2
approximately14,000emaillengthsareclosetozero, depictingthatmostofthe
emails in this dataset are short; however, there are some email lengths that are
above 5000 characters. For the NER model, the widely famous GNB dataset is
used [33]. Each token in this dataset is assigned a label indicating entity (e.g.,
person, organization, location) or a miscellaneous category. Labels are given in
table 1. The dataset is extracted from the GMB corpus, which is tagged and
explicitly annotated for training a classifier to predict named entities, such as
names and locations. GMB is a relatively large corpus of 1 million data points
with extensive annotations. It is labelled using the IOB tagging system, in
which each entity label is prefixed with either B or I. B denotes the beginning,
and I inside of an entity. The words that are not of interest are labelled with
0. Sentence number, word, and POS are the features available in the dataset.
The tag column, which is our target column, assigns a tag to each word in a
sentence. From the count plot below, the distribution of the sentence character
can be observed in Figure 3. From the figure, most of the sentence lengths are
between 100 and 200 characters.
4.2 GrammarasanExplicitInductiveBiasforLightweight
and Domain-Robust Learning
Althoughtransformer-basedarchitectureshavethetheoreticalpotentialtomodel
syntacticdependenciesviaself-attention,thesesyntacticregularitiesarenotex-
plicitly inducted; instead, they are implicitly inferred from data. The quality
andgeneralityofthelearnedsyntacticrepresentationsremain,therefore,highly
dependentonthelexicalcompositionanddomaincharacteristicsofthetraining
corpus. When exposed to limited, noisy, or stylistically divergent data, trans-
formermodelstendtointernalizedomain-specificlexicalcorrelationsratherthan
6
Table 1: Named Entity Categories Used in the GMB Dataset
Label Description
GEO Geographical Entity
ORG Organization
PER Person
GPE Geopolitical Entity
TIM Time Indicator
ART Artifact
EVE Event
NAT Natural Phenomenon
Figure 1: Classification dataset class distribution
7
Figure 2: Classification dataset text data length distribution
Figure 3: NER dataset sentence length distribution
8
domain-invariant structural patterns, resulting in poor generalization perfor-
mance.
In contrast, features induced from grammar capture linguistic regularities
that are, for the most part, domain-independent and independent of surface
vocabulary. They cover aspects of structural properties, such as phrase hier-
archy, dependency relations, and compositionality constraints, which remain
stable across genres, topics, and styles. By incorporating such grammar-based
informant signals into the representation space, the current framework makes
an explicit inductive bias toward linguistically plausible configurations. This
biases the hypothesis space toward structural coherence, reducing reliance on
domain-specificterminologyandoverfittingundersmallorheterogeneoustrain-
ing conditions.
Importantly, it is emphasized that this proposed approach does not try to
discard or suppress any kind of representation learning by transformers. Nor
does it need to retrain or re-task complex syntax-conscious transformer mod-
els. It should be noted that the grammar feature provides structural cues that
supplement semantic representations. This enables a desired balance between
structural guidance and expressive semantic capacity within a single model.
This serves as a very valuable alternative to end-to-end approaches that com-
bine transformers with syntax.
Furthermore,withregardtogrammar-basedfeatures,itcanbearguedthat,
in line with a learning theory perspective, grammar-based features should be
understood as having provided an inductive bias in their capacity as analogues
of a prior applied over the space of possible hypotheses. Finally, the strong
consistency in model performance improvement across diverse data sets and
model configurations supports the view that grammar-based inductive biases
provide unconditional benefits for both model architecture and domain-specific
semantics. Across diverse data sets and model configurations support the view
thatgrammar-basedinductivebiasesprovideunconditionalbenefitswithregard
to both model architecture and domain-specific semantics.
4.3 Model diagram
We proposed a hybrid, grammar-aware, transformer-based learning framework
toimprovetextclassificationperformanceacrossmultipledomains. TheFigure
4 shows the model architecture of our proposed system, comprising four steps:
dataset preprocessing, extraction of grammar- and text-based features, feature
fusion, and model training and evaluation.
4.3.1 Text processing
In Natural Language Processing (NLP), the manipulation, analysis, and inter-
pretation of textual data using computational methods are crucial for enabling
machines to understand and analyze natural language [34]. Text preprocessing
is a vital step in preparing raw text data for NLP models. It involves clean-
ing and transforming text to ensure that the algorithms can understand and
9
Figure 4: Model diagram of the proposed system
10
train the model effectively. Because both datasets contain emojis, emoticons,
spaces,andpunctuation,theymaycomplicatetherobusttrainingofourmodels.
Therefore,duringthepreprocessingandcleaningphase,weremovedemoticons,
emojis, and extra spaces, and then corrected spelling. In the email classifica-
tion dataset, many words were incorrect. The cleaned text is then fed into two
parallel feature-extraction paths [35].
4.3.2 Feature extraction
Feature extraction is a fundamental task that converts raw text data into a
format that is easily processed by machine learning algorithms [36]. After
preprocessing the text, grammar-based and context features were extracted.
Grammar-basedfeaturesincludesyntacticandstructuralinsights,suchasPOS,
syntactic dependency relations, phrase-structure patterns, verb-adverb ratio,
clause count, parse tree, and complex-sentence indicators, to capture the un-
derlying grammatical style and discourse flow of each document. These depth
featuresintexthelpmodelstoidentifycomplexpatternsinthetext. thevector
isconstructedfromgrammaticalandtextualfeaturesandthenmergedwiththe
vector representation of the sentence.
4.3.3 Model training and validating
Tomeasuretheeffectivenessoftheproposedmodel,wehaveusedmultipledeep
learning and transformer-based models. We split the dataset 80:20 for training
and testing the model.
4.4 Proposed grammar feature extraction model
Feature extraction is a technique in NLP that converts text into vector repre-
sentations, reducing dimensionality and data complexity to improve algorith-
mic performance and efficiency. The Advanced grammar feature extractor is
designed to encode linguistic and syntactic properties of text into numerical
features.
4.4.1 Building grammar-based feature vector
Syntactic analysis [37] gets the structure or grammar of the sentences. Pro-
cessing a sentence syntactically involves determining the subject and predicate
and the place of nouns, verbs, pronouns, etc. Table 2 provides the details of
grammar-basedfeatures. POStagging’sprimaryroleistohelpNLPsystemsun-
derstand the syntactic structure of text, which is critical for higher-level tasks
such as parsing, semantic analysis, and machine translation. Calculating the
POS ratio in a sentence would help detect sentence composition and writing
style that vary by task [38]. Now for a text sentence S containing
S ={t ,t ,...,t }
1 2 N
11
tokens, and the set of POS tokens P for our proposed model are
P ={NOUN, VERB, ADJ, ADV, PRON, PROPN, ADP, DET, NUM, CCONJ}
(cid:80)N
1
POS (S)= i=1 {POS(ti)=p} (1)
p (cid:80)N
1
i=1 {POS(ti)∈P}
SentenceLengthisanimportantmetricforassessingReadabilitylevel,Writer’s
style, and Text complexity. It also shows how complex the sentence is, as the
longer the sentence, the more difficult it is to interpret. For a sentence S with
t tokens, the average sentence length formula is
N
1 (cid:88)
Avg length= |S | (2)
N i
i=1
Here, N is the number of sentences in the text. Function words establish rela-
tionshipsbetweenwords,showingtense,possession,orconnectingideas. Deter-
miners,conjunctions,auxiliaries,andarticlesarefunctionwords. Theseinclude
words such as he, the, and those, as well as and, or, and but. The more func-
tionwordspresentinthesentence,themorecomplicatedthestructurebecomes,
whereasmissingfunctionwordsdenotethatthestructureisincorrect. Basedon
this feature, our model can also distinguish between formal and informal text,
asacademictextscontainmorefunctionwords[39]. Fromapredefinedfunction
words set F, our model detects those, and the formula is
|{t :t ∈F}|
R = i i (3)
F T
Here, T is the number of total tokens in the text.
A noun phrase is a group of two or more words headed by a noun that
includes modifiers. A typical noun phrase consists of a noun together with zero
or more dependents of various types. Noun phrases typically bear argument
functions [40]. Every sentence is structured around a verb and a predicate, and
everypredicateisconsideredasaverbphrase;. Itrepresentsacrucialtechnique
in NLP for identifying and isolating the core semantic units within a sentence.
In information extraction models, such as NER models that incorporate these
noun and verb phrases, systems can efficiently identify entities, events, and
relations. These two noun and verb phrase formulas count how many phrases
are in the text.
K
NP
count=(cid:88) 1(cid:0)
tokens ∈{NOUN, PROPN,
ADJ}+(cid:1)
(4)
k
k=1
N
(cid:88)
VP count= 1(POS(t )∈V ∧ (i=1 ∨ POS(t )∈/ V)) (5)
i i−1
i=1
Here, V ={AUX,VERB,ADV,PART}
12
A clause is a combination of words that make up a sentence. It consists of
a subject and a predicate. There are two types of clauses: independent and
dependent. The clause count used to build a grammar-based feature vector
directly measures syntactic maturity, cognitive complexity, and expressive ca-
pacityintexts[41]. Ourclause-countformuladeterminesthenumberofclausal
relations in the dependency tree.
N
(cid:88) (cid:0) (cid:1)
clause count= 1 dep(t )∈C (6)
i
i=1
C ={csubj, csubjpass, ccomp, advcl, acl, xcomp}
The ratio of adverbs to verbs indicates to the model whether the sentence is
descriptive or complex. The larger the ratio value, the greater the emphasis on
the manner, time, or frequency of actions.
N
adv verb ratio= ADV (7)
N +ε
VERB
where
N =number of adverbs in the sentence or text
ADV
N =number of verbs (may include auxiliaries if desired)
VERB
ε=small constant (e.g., 10−6) to avoid division by zero
The passive voice represents that the subject is one acted upon by the action
or verb in the sentence. In our proposed model, we calculated the passive ratio
to assess the formal or descriptive writing style.
N
passive ratio= passive (8)
N +ε
VERB
where
N =number of verbs in passive constructions
passive
N =total number of verbs
VERB
ε=small constant (e.g., 10−6) to avoid division by zero
A parse tree is an ordered tree that represents the syntactic structure of a
string or a sentence. It helps identify the sentence’s complexity [42]. The parse
tree equation based on our proposed model
N
1 (cid:88)
parse tree depth= d(t ) (9)
N i
i=1
where
d(t )=depth of token t in the dependency parse tree
i i
N =total number of tokens in the sentence or text
13
Table 2: Linguistic Feature Groups with Descriptions and Advantages
Feature Group Description Advantage
POS Ratios Ratio of different part-of-speech Captures syntactic distribution
tags (nouns, verbs, adjectives, and word-class patterns
etc.)
Sentence Length Number of words or tokens per Indicates structural complexity
sentence
Function Words Frequency of prepositions, con- Reflectsgrammaticalcorrectness
junctions, articles, pronouns
NP/VP Counts Count of noun phrases and verb Captures phrase structure pat-
phrases terns
Clause Count Number of clauses (main and Measures syntactic complexity
subordinate) per sentence
Adv/Verb Ratio Ratio of adverbs to verbs Stylistic and linguistic emphasis
Passive Ratio Proportion of passive voice con- Formality indicator
structions
Parse Tree Depth Maximum depth of syntactic Overall sentence complexity
parse tree
When all the features of your grammar-based model are ready, we have
created a fixed-length feature vector of
 
POS ratio Avg length R
f
F = NP count VP count Clause count 
adv verb ratio passive ratio parse tree depth
14
Algorithm 1 Grammar Feature Extractor
1: Class GrammarExtractor:
2: ▷ INIT():
3: Load spaCy, add sentencizer, define F, P
4:
5: ▷ count clauses(doc):
6: C ←{csubj,...,xcomp}
7: return #{t∈doc|t.dep∈C}
8:
9: ▷ parse depth(doc):
10: for t∈doc: d←1+steps to root(t)
11: return mean(depths) or 0
12:
13: ▷ passive ratio(doc):
14: V ←{t∈doc|t.pos=VERB}
15: P v ←{v ∈V |v.tag =VBN∨v.dep=auxpass}
16: return |P v|/|V| if |V|>0 else 0
17:
18: ▷ extract(texts):
19: for doc in nlp.pipe(texts):
20: 1. POS ratios: R p = (cid:80) #{t #|t {.p to |ts .= pop s} =p}
p∈P
21: 2. Avg sent len: L=mean(|s| for s∈doc.sents)
22: 3. Func word ratio: F r = # |{ dt o∈ cF |}
23: 4. NP/VP counts: Count sequences, count verbs
24: 5. Advanced: clauses, adv/verb, passive, parse depth
25: return DataFrame→numpy array
4.4.2 Fusion of Grammar-Based Features with Contextual Embed-
dings
To enrich token-level representations with explicit syntactic information, we
integrate the extracted grammar features with contextual embeddings derived
from a pre-trained BERT model. In semantic analysis, word sense disambigua-
tion is the automated process of determining a word’s sense in a given context.
Asnaturallanguageconsistsofwordswithseveralmeanings, theobjectivehere
is to recognize the correct meaning based on its use. Semantic analysis facil-
itates the processing of queries and their interpretation, thereby enabling an
organization to discern the customer’s preferences. The goal of semantic analy-
sisistoextractexactmeaning,ordictionarymeaning,fromthetext. Extracting
boththesemanticandsyntacticstructuresofthesentencewouldprovideamore
precise representation for learning complex patterns from texts.
Let a sentence S = {t ,t ,...,t } have a grammar feature vector G(S) ∈
1 2 N
Rdg and BERT produce contextual embeddings
E =[e 1,e 2,...,e N]∈RN×db
15
Where d and d are the dimensions of the grammar vector and BERT embed-
g b
dings, respectively.
Concatenation can be applied:
e˜ =[e ∥G′(S)] (10)
i i
where ∥ denotes vector concatenation. The fused embeddings
E˜ =[e˜ ,...,e˜ ] (11)
1 N
are then fed into downstream layers, such as a transformer encoder or a task-
specific classifier.
Now, the fuse vector combines contextual information about the text with
linguistic details about its structure.
4.5 Algorithm used
4.6 Deep Belief Network
A DBN is a graphical representation of a deep neural network composed of
multiple layers of hidden variables, with connections between layers but not
within each layer. It can be denoted as a collection of simple learning models,
each a restricted type of RBM. A DBN is constructed by stacking multiple
RBMs trained in a greedy layer-wise fashion. The joint distribution is defined
as:
1
P(v,h)= exp(−E(v,h)) (12)
Z
Here h(1),......,h(L) denotes hidden layers DBN uses a loss function L to
CE
measure the error between the predicted and true value.
N C
1 (cid:88)(cid:88)
L =− y log(yˆ ) (13)
CE N n,i n,i
n=1i=1
here,N isthenumberofsamples,y truelevel,andlog(yˆ )errorinpredicted
n,i n,i
level.
Alayerofhiddenunitsrepresentsfeaturesthatcapturehigher-orderpatterns
inthetext’scorrelations. ThekeyideabehindDBNarchitectureisitsweight,w,
which an RBM learns, defines both p(v|h,w) and the prior distribution over
hidden layers vector p(h|w). The probability of generating a visible vector
(cid:88)
p(v)= p(h|w)p(v |h,w) (14)
h
4.6.1 BiLSTM
The BiLSTM model efficiently captures temporal dependencies in sequential
data, thereby improving input representation by accurately tracking the input
16
direction using forward and backward modules. Each is constructed with a
bidirectionalLSTMfeaturingdistinctarchitectures[43]. Thesemodulessharea
common output layer, allowing each unit to access comprehensive information
from both past and future inputs simultaneously. Each operation in the model
is associated with a weight w. During Bi-LSTM operation, data flows through
both forward and backward hidden states, yielding a hidden-layer output that
incorporates bidirectional temporal processing [44]
4.6.2 BIDIRECTIONALENCODERREPRESENTATIONSFROM
TRANSFORMERS (BERT)
BERTisatransformer-basedlanguagemodeldesignedtolearndeepword-level
semantics by analyzing context. In contrast to other language models that
process text sequentially from left to right, BERT’s bidirectionality enables it
to capture more subtle syntactic and semantic dependencies by simultaneously
consideringtheentiresentenceorpassage. Itsglobalperspectiveallowsamodel
to capture subtle linguistic phenomena, such as polysemy (multiword meaning)
and long-distance dependencies [45]. It pretrains BERT on large amounts of
text using two general approaches. The first is masked language modeling, in
which words in a sentence are randomly masked, and the Model is prompted to
predict them from the context provided by the exposed words alone [46]. The
architecture of the transformer based model are given in 5. The mask language
model equation
L
=−(cid:88)
log
exp(w x⊤ ih i)
(15)
MLM (cid:80)V exp(w⊤h )
i∈M j=1 j i
Here,M ismaskedtokenposition,h ,hiddenstateatithposition,andw isthe
i j
weight. This leads BERT to learn how words interact with one another across
diverse contexts. The second task, Next Sentence Prediction, trains the model
to predict whether two given sentences are logically ordered, in the sense that
it learns semantic relations between sentences, which is crucial for sentence-
pair tasks. This pretraining makes BERT an extremely context-sensitive word-
andsentence-embeddinggeneratorand,whenfine-tunedondownstreamnatural
language processing tasks such as NER, question answering, sentiment analy-
sis, and text classification, performs exceptionally well. By incorporating more
contextual information than previous models, BERT significantly improved the
state of the art across a wide range of NLP tasks [47].
4.6.3 XLNET
XLNetisatransformer-basedmodelthatintroducesanovelpermutation-based
training. Themodelistrainedoneachpermutationoftheinputsequencerather
than on a predetermined order. This method enables efficient management of
bidirectional context without using masked tokens or artificial token masking
for specific tokens [49]. XLNet adopts the Transformer-XL architecture and
employsarecurrencemechanismthatextendsthecontextwindowbeyondfixed-
sizedsegments, therebyefficientlymodelinglong-rangetextdependencies. This
17
Figure5: Transnformerbasedmodelarchitecturewithencoderanddecoder[48]
18
makes XLNet particularly well-suited to learning and processing longer text,
where it is desirable to capture how distant words relate to one another. By
predicting tokens in random order, XLNet can discover patterns in higher-level
dependencies and model language more effectively [50].
4.7 performance Metrics
To compare the performance of the proposed system, four key measures of per-
formance accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score were used to assess the pro-
posed model. Accuracy is the proportion of correctly predicted values among
all instances. It quantifies the model’s overall accuracy by calculating the ratio
of correctly labeled sensitive and non-sensitive entities to the total number of
predictions. While helpful, it is misleading in biased datasets where sensitive
data is less frequent. Precision is the proportion of true positive (TP) predic-
tions among all positive predictions. Precision is used to determine the number
of sensitive cases identified, thereby reducing false positives (FPs) and unnec-
essary encryption, which can affect performance and storage. Recall examines
how well the model detects all the present sensitive data. It is significant that
missing a positive instance, such as a false negative (FN), is more costly than
misclassifying a negative instance as positive (false positive, FP). A high recall
rate ensures that sensitive information is not left behind, reducing the risk of
data breaches. Since precision and recall are in trade-off, the F1-score is the
harmonic mean of the two, providing a balanced measure of the model’s ac-
curacy in identifying sensitive [51]. The equations for these metrics are given
below:
TP +TN
Accuracy= (16)
TP +TN +FP +FN
TP
Precision= (17)
TP +FP
TP
Recall= (18)
TP +FN
Precision×Recall
F1-score=2× (19)
Precision+Recall
5 Result and Discussion
We have used five algorithms, such as BiLSTM, BERT, XLNet, LSTM, and
DBN, with varied epoch numbers to measure the effectiveness of our proposed
modelstructureofthetransformer,whichisgiveninTable7. Wehavecompared
resultsacrosstwodatasetstoassesstheefficacyofthiscombinedgrammar-based
and contextual-feature approach in diverse domains, with respect to robustness
andadaptability. Whetherourmodelcanlearncomplexpatternsacrossdiverse
environmentsandtexttypes. Additionally, acomparisonofmodelperformance
with and withoutthe grammarfeature was conductedto assessits contribution
to the overall effectiveness of the proposed method.
19
Table3: PerformanceMetricsofDifferentAlgorithmswithoutgrammarfeature
Model Accuracy (%) Precision (%) Recall (%) F1-Score (%)
LSTM 93.00 89.90 84.10 86.00
BiLSTM 89.80 84.70 77.11 80.74
DBN 91.15 88.12 78.43 82.90
BERT 94.00 90.52 89.59 90.00
XLNET 94.50 90.60 89.25 89.90
5.1 Classification dataset performance
Thetable3presentsthebaselineperformanceoffivealgorithms,namely,LSTM,
BiLSTM, DBN, BERT, and XLNet, without the proposed grammar-based fea-
tures of the classification dataset. We used only contextual feature vectors,
BERT tokenization, word embeddings, and TF-IDF, and compared model per-
formance. Amongthefivealgorithms,theBERTmodelperformedbest,achiev-
ing an accuracy of 93%, with precision and recall of 90%, and only the F1 score
wasbelow90%. XLNetmodelperformanceisalsocomparabletothatofBERT.
Among three deep learning algorithms, DBN, LSTM, and BiLSTM, LSTM has
the highest accuracy of 93%. The LSTM’s recall value is very low, at 84%,
indicating that it missed many actual values. On the other hand, BiLSTM
and DBN recall values are below 80%. The BiLSTM demonstrates the lowest
performance among the models. 6.
Figure 6: Classification model performance without grammar features
Thetable4. Thistableshowstheperformanceclassificationdatasetwiththe
proposed feature fusion model that enhanced the model’s overall performance
by 2-7%. BiLSTM performance increased significantly with an accuracy of
96.19%, a precision of 94.69%, a recall of 91.45%, and an f1 score of 93%.
On the contrary, the performance metrics of the DBN algorithm are the lowest
among the others, with a recall of 85%; however, it showed progress compared
20
Table4: PerformanceMetricsofDifferentModelswithgrammar-basedfeatures
Model Accuracy (%) Precision (%) Recall (%) F1-Score (%)
BiLSTM 96.19 94.69 91.45 93.04
BERT 96.48 93.46 93.91 93.69
XLNet 96.01 95.11 90.29 92.64
LSTM 95.82 94.76 89.94 92.28
DBN 93.27 89.43 85.97 87.66
with the baseline model. Additionally, the performance of BERT and XLNet
is similar, as they are both transformer models, achieving an accuracy of 96%.
These comparisons highlight that fused feature vectors provide complementary
structural information that significantly enhances the representational quality
of sentence embeddings, leading to improved classification performance across
diverse models 7.
Figure 7: Classification model performance with grammar features
5.2 NER dataset performance
The performance of the NER model without a grammar-based feature vector is
demonstrated in Table 5. According to the table, the BERT model performed
best, achieving an accuracy of 93.29%, precision of 92.8%, recall of 90.32%,
and F1 score of 92.73%. Bert is the only model whose performance across all
metrics exceeds 90%. Except for the precision value (88.80%). The DBN algo-
rithm’s precision value is 88.8%. Both LSTM (85.45% accuracy) and BiLSTM
(85.25% accuracy) show similar moderate performance with notably lower pre-
cision around 72-74%, indicating they produce more false positives. In this
NER dataset, XLNet performed worst with the lowest accuracy of 84.53% and
precision of 71.61% depicts in Figure 8
21
Table 5: Performance Metrics of NER models without grammatical feature
Model Accuracy (%) Precision (%) Recall (%) F1-Score (%)
DBN 91.88 88.80 90.88 90.01
LSTM 85.45 74.10 86.5 78.93
BiLSTM 85.25 72.67 83.25 78.46
BERT 93.29 92.80 90.32 92.73
XLNet 84.53 71.61 88.26 79.43
Figure 8: NER model performance without grammar features
22
Figure 9: NER model performance without grammar features
Accordingtothetable6,theperformanceofallalgorithmsincreaseddramat-
ically, except XLNet. The accuracy of the DBN algorithm increased by almost
4%comparedwithfeaturetrainingwithoutgrammarrules. Moreover,precision
and recall increased by approximately 5%, from 88% to 94%. The accuracy of
the LSTM and BiLSTM models increased significantly, from 85% to 97% for
theBiLSTMmodel. WhentheBiLSTMmodelwastrainedwithoutacombined
feature vector, the precision and F1 scores of these two algorithms were below
80%; however, with our grammar-based feature model, they exceeded 90%, as
shown in Figure 9. Thus, the NER model performs better when feature vectors
are combined with contextual and linguistic information. The observed perfor-
Table 6: Performance Metrics of NER models with grammatical feature
Model Accuracy (%) Precision (%) Recall (%) F1-Score (%)
DBN 95 94 95 94
LSTM 96 94.1 96.5 93.93
BiLSTM 97 93 94 93.3
BERT 95 96 95 93
XLNet 88.67 87 89 87.48
mance gains, achieved without transformer fine-tuning or additional syntactic
encoders, indicate that explicit grammatical inductive biases can substitute for
architecturalcomplexity,enablinglightweightmodelstoapproachorexceedthe
performance of fully fine-tuned transformers in cross-domain settings.
6 discussion
Thisstudyintroducesanovelhybridframeworkthatintegratesgrammar-aware
linguisticfeatures withtransformer-basedembeddings toimproverobustnessin
23
domain-divergent linguistic settings text classification. By combining syntac-
tic structure with deep contextual semantics, the proposed approach effectively
captures domain-invariant patterns and enhances generalization to unseen do-
mains. Our proposed grammar-based feature model has 11 attributes, provid-
ing extensive grammatical information about the sentence. Details are given
in the Table 2. Our framework first extracts structured grammatical features
and then fuses them with Transformer-generated embeddings to train a robust
model. The experimental results demonstrate that integrating grammar-aware
featureextractionsignificantlyenhancescross-domaintextclassificationperfor-
mance. Thebinaryclassificationdatasetperformancewithoutgrammarfeatures
was better, especially for transformer-based models, which can learn more ef-
fectivelythroughtheirattentionmechanisms. However,thecombinedgrammar
and text-based feature vector increased overall performance from 2% to 7% in
the binary classification dataset. In the NER dataset, our proposed grammar-
based features performed best, as entity identification also requires grammar
rules. Because the NER model requires proper grammatical structure to de-
tect entities accurately, our proposed feature vector combines grammatical and
contextual information and could be transformative for textual models. From
Table7,BERT-baseandXLNet-base,whicharestandard12-layerarchitectures,
take almost 440 MB to train, whereas BERT-large and XLNet-large, with 24-
layer versions and larger hidden dimensions, are 1.36GB in size and have 340
million parameters each. On the contrary, our proposed model used only a
frozen BERT model to learn only semantic information. Concatenating them
with frozen embeddings adds very few extra parameters compared to train-
ing a full transformer. Transformers learn general contextual embeddings, but
somedomain-specificpatternsaresubtle. Grammarfeaturesprovidestructured
clues that the model might otherwise take longer to learn from data. Grammar
features are symbolic and don’t depend on patterns in large datasets. When
you train on one domain and test on another, grammar features help maintain
performance. and Embeddings capture semantic meaning, grammar features
capture syntactic structure. Concatenating both more informative represen-
tations without adding trainable transformer parameters. Grammar features
provide prior knowledge, reducing overfitting and boosting accuracy with fewer
samples. Therefore, our proposed model is not only lightweight but also main-
tains performance through smart concatenation with contextual features and
grammar features.
7 Conclusion
This paper proposes an extensive grammar-based feature-extraction algorithm
that combines a deep neural network and a transformer-based model. Whereas
transformer-basedmodels’featurevectorscapturesemanticandsyntacticinfor-
mation, often by pre-training on large-scale text corpora, they usually fail to
capturein-depthgrammaticalstructuresandperformbetterondomain-specific
corpora. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed model, a series of compara-
24
tive experiments is carried out. To assess the model’s robustness, our proposed
model uses two datasets: classification datasets and an NER dataset. The
experimental results indicate that the proposed feature extraction model effec-
tively extracts features across domains, with an average increase of 2%-15% in
accuracy. Theapproachsystematicallyleveragesgrammar-awarefeaturesalong-
side transformer embeddings for robust domain-divergent text classification in
low-resource settings, leading to low-resource model design. Our lightweight
framework combines frozen transformer representations with explicit grammar-
based features, drastically reducing computational overhead without sacrificing
accuracy. This synergy enables efficient learning and improved generalization
compared to fully fine-tuned models.
The main limitation of our proposed system is that grammatical structures
varysubstantiallyacrossdomains(e.g.,socialmediatextversusformalwriting).
We tested only our proposed system on the email classification model and the
NERmodel. Testingonadiversedomainwouldgeneratemoreaccuratereason-
ing for our system. Combining sparse grammar vectors with dense contextual
embeddings requires specialized fusion strategies; however, resource limitations
in our model led us to use a concatenation-based data fusion method.
Inthefuture,wecanintegrateatree-basedencodertolearnsyntacticstruc-
turesdirectlyfromdataandevaluatethemodelacrossawiderrangeofdomains
in a multilingual setting. The proposed framework offers a scalable and reliable
approach to cross-domain text classification, contributing meaningful insights
to the development of domain-agnostic natural language processing systems.
References
[1] K. Chowdhary, “Natural language processing,” Fundamentals of artificial
intelligence, pp. 603–649, 2020.
[2] P. M. Nadkarni, L. Ohno-Machado, and W. W. Chapman, “Natural lan-
guage processing: an introduction,” Journal of the American Medical In-
formatics Association, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 544–551, 2011.
[3] M. Gupta, “Global natural language processing (nlp) market – industry
trends and forecast to 2030,” Data Bridge Market Research, Tech. Rep.,
Sep. 2023, market Research Report, 350 pages, 220 tables, 60 figures.
[Online]. Available: https://www.databridgemarketresearch.com/reports/
global-natural-language-processing-nlp-market
[4] J. Hirschberg and C. D. Manning, “Advances in natural language process-
ing,” Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 261–266, 2015.
[5] I. J. B. Young, S. Luz, and N. Lone, “A systematic review of natural
languageprocessingforclassificationtasksinthefieldofincidentreporting
and adverse event analysis,” International journal of medical informatics,
vol. 132, p. 103971, 2019.
25
[6] J. R. Jim, M. A. R. Talukder, P. Malakar, M. M. Kabir, K. Nur, and
M.F.Mridha,“Recentadvancementsandchallengesofnlp-basedsentiment
analysis: A state-of-the-art review,” Natural Language Processing Journal,
vol. 6, p. 100059, 2024.
[7] D. Braun, A. H. Mendez, F. Matthes, and M. Langen, “Evaluating natu-
ral language understanding services for conversational question answering
systems,” in Proceedings of the 18th annual SIGdial meeting on discourse
and dialogue, 2017, pp. 174–185.
[8] K. Jiang and X. Lu, “Natural language processing and its applications in
machine translation: a diachronic review,” in 2020 IEEE 3rd international
conference of safe production and informatization (IICSPI). IEEE, 2020,
pp. 210–214.
[9] I. Awasthi, K. Gupta, P. S. Bhogal, S. S. Anand, and P. K. Soni, “Natural
languageprocessing(nlp)basedtextsummarization-asurvey,” in2021 6th
InternationalConferenceonInventiveComputationTechnologies(ICICT).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1310–1317.
[10] Y. Kang, Z. Cai, C.-W. Tan, Q. Huang, and H. Liu, “Natural language
processing (nlp) in management research: A literature review,” Journal of
Management Analytics, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 139–172, 2020.
[11] T.Berg-Kirkpatrick,D.Burkett,andD.Klein,“Anempiricalinvestigation
ofstatisticalsignificanceinnlp,”inProceedingsofthe2012jointconference
onempiricalmethodsinnaturallanguageprocessingandcomputationalnat-
ural language learning, 2012, pp. 995–1005.
[12] C.R.Turner,A.Fuggetta,L.Lavazza,andA.L.Wolf,“Aconceptualbasis
for feature engineering,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 49, no. 1,
pp. 3–15, 1999.
[13] S. Scott and S. Matwin, “Feature engineering for text classification,” in
ICML, vol. 99, 1999, pp. 379–388.
[14] D.Wang,J.Su,andH.Yu,“Featureextractionandanalysisofnaturallan-
guage processing for deep learning english language,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 46335–46345, 2020.
[15] A. Onan, “An ensemble scheme based on language function analysis and
feature engineering for text genre classification,” Journal of Information
Science, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 28–47, 2018.
[16] R. Dziseviˇc and D. Sˇeˇsok, “Text classification using different feature ex-
traction approaches,” in 2019 Open Conference of Electrical, Electronic
and Information Sciences (eStream). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
26
[17] S. J. Johnson, M. R. Murty, and I. Navakanth, “A detailed review on word
embedding techniques with emphasis on word2vec,” Multimedia Tools and
Applications, vol. 83, no. 13, pp. 37979–38007, 2024.
[18] T. Cerqueira, F. M. Ribeiro, V. H. Pinto, J. Lima, and G. Gon¸calves,
“Glove prototype for feature extraction applied to learning by demonstra-
tion purposes,” Applied Sciences, vol. 12, no. 21, p. 10752, 2022.
[19] M. Busta, L. Neumann, and J. Matas, “Fastext: Efficient unconstrained
scene text detector,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision, 2015, pp. 1206–1214.
[20] D.Wang,J.Su,andH.Yu,“Featureextractionandanalysisofnaturallan-
guage processing for deep learning english language,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 46335–46345, 2020.
[21] L.Liu,X.Liu,J.Gao,W.Chen,andJ.Han,“Understandingthedifficulty
of training transformers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08249, 2020.
[22] A. Mohasseb, A. Kanavos, and E. Amer, “Enhancing text classification
through grammar-based feature engineering and learning models,” Infor-
mation, vol. 16, no. 6, p. 424, 2025.
[23] S. L. Marie-Sainte and N. Alalyani, “Firefly algorithm based feature se-
lection for arabic text classification,” Journal of King Saud University-
Computer and Information Sciences, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 320–328, 2020.
[24] S. T. Chavali, C. T. Kandavalli et al., “Grammar detection for sentiment
analysis through improved viterbi algorithm,” in 2022 International Con-
ference on Advances in Computing, Communication and Applied Informat-
ics (ACCAI). IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–6.
[25] X. Han, Y. Dang, L. Mei, Y. Wang, S. Li, and X. Zhou, “A novel part
of speech tagging framework for nlp based business process management,”
in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS). IEEE,
2019, pp. 383–387.
[26] S.ChotiratandP.Meesad,“Part-of-speechtaggingenhancementtonatural
languageprocessingforthaiwh-questionclassificationwithdeeplearning,”
Heliyon, vol. 7, no. 10, 2021.
[27] H. Li, H. Mao, and J. Wang, “Part-of-speech tagging with rule-based data
preprocessing and transformer,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 56, 2021.
[28] G. Kou, P. Yang, Y. Peng, F. Xiao, Y. Chen, and F. E. Alsaadi, “Evalua-
tion of feature selection methods for text classification with small datasets
usingmultiplecriteriadecision-makingmethods,”Applied Soft Computing,
vol. 86, p. 105836, 2020.
27
[29] A.ChaudharyandS.Jain,“Enhancingtextclassificationusinghybridem-
beddings and advanced machine learning techniques,” International Jour-
nal of System Assurance Engineering and Management, pp. 1–16, 2025.
[30] F. D. Souza and J. B. d. O. e. S. Filho, “Embedding generation for text
classification of brazilian portuguese user reviews: from bag-of-words to
transformers,” Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 35, no. 13, pp.
9393–9406, 2023.
[31] J. Li, G. Huang, J. Chen, and Y. Wang, “Short text understanding com-
bining text conceptualization and transformer embedding,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 122183–122191, 2019.
[32] B. Klimt and Y. Yang, “The enron corpus: A new dataset for email classi-
ficationresearch,” inEuropean conference on machine learning. Springer,
2004, pp. 217–226.
[33] J.Bos,V.Basile,K.Evang,N.J.Venhuizen,andJ.Bjerva,“Thegroningen
meaning bank,” in Handbook of linguistic annotation. Springer, 2017, pp.
463–496.
[34] C.P.Chai,“Comparisonoftextpreprocessingmethods,”Natural language
engineering, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 509–553, 2023.
[35] R. Egger and E. Gokce, “Natural language processing (nlp): An introduc-
tion: making sense of textual data,” in Applied data science in tourism:
Interdisciplinary approaches, methodologies, and applications. Springer,
2022, pp. 307–334.
[36] D.Wang,J.Su,andH.Yu,“Featureextractionandanalysisofnaturallan-
guage processing for deep learning english language,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 46335–46345, 2020.
[37] M. J. Pickering and R. P. Van Gompel, “Syntactic parsing,” in Handbook
of psycholinguistics. Elsevier, 2006, pp. 455–503.
[38] D.KumawatandV.Jain,“Postaggingapproaches: Acomparison,”Inter-
national Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 118, no. 6, 2015.
[39] L.Guthrie,J.Pustejovsky,Y.Wilks,andB.M.Slator,“Theroleoflexicons
in natural language processing,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 39,
no. 1, pp. 63–72, 1996.
[40] R.SubhashiniandV.J.S.Kumar,“Shallownlptechniquesfornounphrase
extraction,” in Trendz in information sciences & computing (tisc2010).
IEEE, 2010, pp. 73–77.
[41] R. M. Losee, “Natural language processing in support of decision-making:
phrases and part-of-speech tagging,” Information processing & manage-
ment, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 769–787, 2001.
28
[42] E. M. Sibarani, M. Nadial, E. Panggabean, and S. Meryana, “A study of
parsing process on natural language processing in bahasa indonesia,” in
2013 IEEE 16th International Conference on Computational Science and
Engineering. IEEE, 2013, pp. 309–316.
[43] J. Sangeetha and U. Kumaran, “A hybrid optimization algorithm using
bilstmstructureforsentimentanalysis,”Measurement: Sensors,vol.25,p.
100619, 2023.
[44] Y. Lu, L. Tang, C. Chen, L. Zhou, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Jiang, and B. Yang,
“Reconstructionofstructurallong-termaccelerationresponsebasedonbil-
stm networks,” Engineering Structures, vol. 285, p. 116000, 2023.
[45] G. Jawahar, B. Sagot, and D. Seddah, “What does bert learn about the
structure of language?” in ACL 2019-57th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
[46] M. V. Koroteev, “Bert: a review of applications in natural language pro-
cessing and understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.11943, 2021.
[47] K. Clark, U. Khandelwal, O. Levy, and C. D. Manning, “What does bert
lookat? ananalysisofbert’sattention,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04341,
2019.
[48] A. Vaswani, S. Bengio, E. Brevdo, F. Chollet, A. Gomez, S. Gouws,
L. Jones, L(cid:32) . Kaiser, N. Kalchbrenner, N. Parmar et al., “Tensor2tensor
for neural machine translation,” in Proceedings of the 13th Conference of
the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas (Volume 1: Re-
search Track), 2018, pp. 193–199.
[49] Z.Yang,Z.Dai,Y.Yang,J.Carbonell,R.R.Salakhutdinov,andQ.V.Le,
“Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understand-
ing,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[50] A. F. Adoma, N.-M. Henry, and W. Chen, “Comparative analyses of bert,
roberta, distilbert, and xlnet for text-based emotion recognition,” in 2020
17th international computer conference on wavelet active media technology
and information processing (ICCWAMTIP). IEEE, 2020, pp. 117–121.
[51] X.-H. Sun and J. L. Gustafson, “Toward a better parallel performance
metric,” Parallel Computing, vol. 17, no. 10-11, pp. 1093–1109, 1991.
29
nosirapmoC
erutcetihcrA
ledoM
:7
elbaT
ledoM
.xorppA
-aP
elbaniarT
-emaraP
latoT
noitnettA
eziS
neddiH
sreyaL
desU
enobkcaB
ledoM
)23PF(
eziS
sretemar
sret
sdaeH
BM23.5
M33.1
M33.1
A/N
46
sreyal5
sgniddebmEelbaniarT
MTSL
BM25.5
M83.1
M83.1
A/N
2×84
sreyal5
sgniddebmEelbaniarT
MTSLiB
BM36.0
K751
K751
A/N
46→821→652
sreyal3
2v-6L-MLiniMnezorF
desoporp(TREB
)ledom
BM54.0
K211
K211
A/N
84→69→291
sreyal3
2v-6L-MLiniMnezorF
-orp(
teNLX
)ledomdesop
BM02.0
K94
K94
A/N
46→652
sreyal2
-821(
FDI-FT-ACP
NBD
)mid
BM8.09
)nezorf(0
M7.22
21
483
remrofsnarT6
2v-6L-MLiniM
enobkcaBTREB
BM044
M011
M011
21
867
remrofsnarT21
esab-TREB
esab-TREBlluF
BG63.1
M043
M043
61
4201
remrofsnarT42
egral-TREB
egral-TREBlluF
BM044
M011
M011
21
867
remrofsnarT21
esab-teNLX
esab-teNLXlluF
BG63.1
M043
M043
61
4201
remrofsnarT42
egral-teNLX
egral-teNLXlluF
30