International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC) Vol 11, Issue 1 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.31436/ijpcc.v11i1.533
Fine-tuning Large Language Model (BERT) for Islamic Moral
Inquiry and Response
Nurul Aiman Binti Mohd Nazri, A'wathif Binti Omar, Amir 'Aatieff Bin Amir Hussin*
Dept. of Computer Science, KICT, International Islamic University Malaysia, 53100 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
*Corresponding author amiraatieff@iium.edu.my
(Received: 3rd January, 2025; Accepted: 15th January, 2025; Published on-line: 30th January, 2025)
Abstract—The development of Large Language Models (LLM) that are capable of understanding and
responding to issues from an Islamic perspective is extremely insightful as it will benefit many people. For
an LLM to do so, it is not enough for the model to only understand the language, but it also needs to
understand the context and specific doctrines within the Islamic texts due to the complexity of Islamic
jurisprudence and moral philosophy. Therefore, in this research, we intend to fine-tune an LLM model which
is known as Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) for Islamic moral inquiry and
response. By incorporating Islamic principles, norms, and teaching into the model, we aim to enhance the
pre-trained BERT model’s ability to perform moral-related Question Answering (QA) tasks. The original
model that we chose is deepset BERT model which was built based on BERT-large and meticulously pre-
trained using the SQuaD 2.0 dataset, specifically for QA tasks. We fine-tune the model using the data
extracted from “Islam: Questions and Answers: Character and Morals”, the Volume 13 of a Series of Islamic
Books by Muhammad Saed Abdul-Rahman, where the data has been cleaned and pre-processed. The fine-
tuning process used supervised learning techniques, to ensure its proficiency in understanding Islamic
principles, providing accurate, contextually appropriate, and theologically sound responses. We assessed
the model using F1 score and Levenshtein similarity evaluation metrics where F1 score merges precision and
recall by computing their harmonic mean, while Levenshtein similarity compares the predicted and actual
answers at the character level by normalizing the Levenshtein distance. Our research yielded significant
success, evidenced by the remarkable enhancement in the average F1 scores and Levenshtein similarities,
soaring from 0.30 and 0.24, to 0.74 and 0.67 respectively.
Keywords—Large Language Models (LLMs), BERT, Fine-Tuning, Domain-Specific, Question-Answering
Systems
This study intends to improve the Bidirectional Encoder
I. INTRODUCTION
Representations from Transformers (BERT) model's ability
Large Language Models (LLMs), like GPT-3 and BERT, are to handle Islamic moral enquiries. By leveraging a dataset
sophisticated neural networks that are well-known for their selected from reliable Islamic sources, such as Muhammad
ability to efficiently comprehend and generate human Saed Abdul-Rahman's book "Islam: Questions and Answers:
language. These models have shown incredibly adaptable, Character and Morals" [24], this work seeks to improve
performing exceptionally well across a range of Natural BERT's capacity to deliver precise, contextually relevant,
Language Processing (NLP) tasks. LLMs are trained on and theologically sound answers. To ensure that the model
domain-specific datasets in a process called fine-tuning, is capable of answering Islamic moral concerns, rigorous
which enhances their efficacy for specific domains. Through data preprocessing, augmentation, and hyperparameter
this process, the models are more equipped to handle optimisation are used. This research has practical
particular tasks and difficulties in specific areas. The implications for developing AI systems that respect and
requirement for refined LLMs is particularly important in the uphold cultural and religious values, making it significant
context of Islamic moral inquiry and responses. Although beyond academic study. By bridging the gap between AI and
general-purpose models offer strong linguistic capabilities, Islamic ethics, this study contributes to the creation of
they frequently fall short in terms of theological precision culturally sensitive technology, allowing communities to
and cultural awareness required to produce answers that effectively use AI tools while adhering to their moral and
are consistent with Islamic values. Responses produced by ethical framework.
generic models, for example, could unintentionally distort The remainder of the paper is organised as follows:
Islamic principles or overlook the complex ethical lessons Section II provides a survey of the literature on Large
incorporated into Islamic jurisprudence. A focused approach Language Models, focusing on BERT's design and
to fine-tuning that integrates genuine Islamic scriptures, and approaches for domain-specific fine-tuning. Section III
specialised knowledge is necessary for bridging this gap.
88
International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC) Vol 11, Issue 1 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.31436/ijpcc.v11i1.533
outlines the study's methodology, Section IV contains the The figure illustrates the core components of
findings and analysis, and Section V concludes the research. Transformer model which made of two components, the
Encoder (left) and Decoder (right). The Encoder examines
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
input texts to understand the context of the sentence,
There is an expanding corpus of research on fine-tuning selects important parts, and creates an embedding for each
LLMs for domain-specific tasks, notably to address the limits word based on its relationship to other words in the
of general-purpose models. This section summarises sentence. The main goal of the Encoder is to comprehend
findings from existing literature and related studies, the input text thoroughly. The output of this Encoder will
including research papers, journals, and articles on LLMs and then be passed to the Decoder. Based on this input on the
their fine-tuning. The discussion covers core principles, fine- context understanding from the Encoder as well as the
tuning approaches, and domain-specific applications, with a information from the previously generated words, the
particular emphasis on adapting these models to Islamic Decoder will generate responses. It will continue to predict
moral inquiry. the next word and write it out one word at a time.
BERT was pre-trained on extensive corpus of text, for
A. Overview of Large Language Models (LLMs)
example Wikipedia and BooksCorpus for the purpose of
LLMs are deep learning algorithms that perform well in a performing downstream NLP tasks such as Named Entity
range of NLP applications. These models, like GPT-3 [6], Recognition (NER), QA, and relation extraction [23]. The pre-
BERT [7], and LLaMA2 [4], are pre-trained on massive training procedure uses two unsupervised tasks which are
datasets, allowing them to understand language patterns, Masked Language Modelling (MLM) and Next Sentence
grammar, and context. Despite their adaptability, LLMs have Prediction (NSP) as mentioned by Devlin et al. [7]. After the
limits in domain-specific contexts, demanding further fine- pre-training procedure, BERT can be fine-tuned for
tuning to produce contextually correct and appropriate particular tasks by adding a few task-specific parameters,
results [14]. thereby integrating domain-specific knowledge. For
instance, BioBERT is an excellent example of BERT model
B. Foundation Models and LLM Pre-training
that has been trained on specific domain, where it is trained
Foundation models are pre-trained using self-supervised
on biomedical text to be utilized in biomedical domain.
learning and serve as the foundation for developing
specialised NLP systems. They derive linguistic
representations from large amounts of unlabelled input,
allowing for greater flexibility in downstream tasks such as
text categorisation and Question Answering (QA) [5].
Examples include BERT and GPT-3, which have
revolutionised NLP with their rigorous pre-training
approaches.
C. BERT
BERT, or Bidirectional Encoder Representation of
Transformers, is a sort of language model known for
attaining state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance across a wide
range of NLP tasks and applications, as stated by Cheon and
Ahn [11]. BERT's core design is built on the Transformer
architecture, which allows models to process words in
parallel rather than sequentially using self-attention or intra-
attention mechanisms. Self-attention, a process for
focussing on pertinent information, generates
representations of a sequence or sentence by linking various
places in it [8]. This technique allows the model to assess
the importance of each word in a phrase while focussing on
all other words, capturing linkages and dependencies within
that sentence. As a result, models can be more efficient and
successful in context modelling. The Transformer
architecture can be seen in Figure 1 below. Fig. 1 The Transformer Architecture [8]
89
International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC) Vol 11, Issue 1 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.31436/ijpcc.v11i1.533
D. Fine Tuning for Domain-Specific Tasks applying established approaches to the specific problems of
Existing literature highlights the critical role of fine-tuning Islamic ethical systems.
in enhancing LLM performance for specific domains. For
III. METHODOLOGY
example, MufassirQAS uses Retrieval Augmented
This section provides an explanation of the methodology
Generation (RAG) to rectify weaknesses in general-purpose
employed in the article, including the framework, datasets,
models while replying to Islamic enquiries [9]. This strategy
and assessment measures. Based on Fig. 2, the dataset used
reduces hallucinations, resulting in trustworthy and
in this project comes from Muhammad Saed Abdul-
courteous replies based on theological principles. Similarly,
Rahman's book "Islam: Questions and Answers, Character
QASiNa highlights the value of curated datasets such as the
and Morals," Volume 13 of a comprehensive series of Islamic
Sirah Nabawiyyah in constructing models that outperform
publications [24]. Both Muslims and non-Muslims have
general-purpose LLMs in Islamic question-answering tasks
contributed questions and answers on Islam to the book
[10].
[24]. The majority of these responses are taken from
In the biomedical area, research like Haddouche et al. [13]
reputable Islamic scholars, such as Shaykh al-Islam Ibn
emphasise the value of domain-specific models like as
Taymiyah, Ibn Katheer, al-Albaani, Shaykh Ibn Baaz, and
BioBERT and RoBERTa, fine-tuned on datasets like SQuAD
several others [24]. The sample question and answer:
and COVID-QA, for answering medical questions. These
models outperform their general-purpose counterparts in TABLE I
terms of extracting relevant and accurate data. CONTEXT, QUESTION AND ANSWER EXTRACTED FROM THE BOOK
E. Techniques and Innovations
Context “The Quraan and Sunnah emphasize the
importance of fulfilling promises and
Innovative approaches have evolved to enhance fine-
commitments. Allaah says (interpretation
tuning results:
of the meaning): 'And fulfil (every)
1. Two-Step Fine-Tuning: Sequential training on
covenant. Verily, the covenant will be
general and domain-specific datasets improves questioned about' [al-Isra’ 17:34]. The
performance in clinical question-and-answer tasks [1]. Prophet (peace and blessings of Allaah be
2. Synthetic Data Generation: The SQuAD-sr project upon him) also said: 'The signs of a
for Serbian shows that creating synthetic datasets can help hypocrite are three: when he speaks, he
design quality assurance systems for low-resource lies; when he makes a promise, he breaks it;
languages [14]. and when he is entrusted, he betrays.'
3. Domain-Specific Adaptation: Models such as (Narrated by al-Bukhaari and Muslim).
BioBERT and BloombergGPT demonstrate the effectiveness Breaking promises is a major sin, and it is
of domain-specific pre-training and fine-tuning in biology essential for Muslims to adhere to their
and finance [13]. words and commitments unless there is a
valid excuse.”
F. Challenges in Fine-Tuning
Question What is the Islamic ruling on breaking
Despite advancements, fine-tuning poses considerable
promises?
problems. The paucity of high-quality, domain-specific
datasets is a recurring challenge, as evidenced by research Answer “Breaking promises is a major sin, and it is
essential for Muslims to adhere to their
on under-represented languages such as Serbian [14].
words and commitments unless there is a
Furthermore, applying general-purpose models to specific
valid excuse.”
areas sometimes necessitates considerable computing
resources and domain expertise. Parameter-Efficient Fine-
Tuning (PEFT) aims to address these issues by minimising These responses are grounded in authentic sources,
parameter changes, lowering computing costs, and including the Qur'an and Sunnah, ensuring the theological
retaining model efficiency [16]. accuracy and authenticity of the content. The dataset
preparation involved extracting questions and answers
G. Implications for Islamic Moral Inquiry
relevant to ethical and moral topics. Each entry was
The effectiveness of domain-specific LLMs demonstrates
categorized into themes such as personal ethics, societal
how fine-tuning models may effectively handle Islamic moral
duties, and economic morality.
enquiries. Models can offer accurate, contextually sensitive,
and theologically sound responses by including curated
datasets and utilising sophisticated fine-tuning approaches.
This study draws on previous research in adjacent topics,
90
International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC) Vol 11, Issue 1 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.31436/ijpcc.v11i1.533
interpretations of the questions and answers aiming that
the BERT model can provide responses that are accurate and
appropriate according to Islamic principles. There are
several important elements involved in this process. First,
variance in context. We find various contexts based on the
dataset, and each context provides distinct information. For
example, one setting focus on the integrity in Islam, while
the other context is about Islamic principles on verifying
Fig. 2 Fine-tuning Framework
news. This technique guarantees the BERT model covered a
A. Task Dataset wide range of Islamic knowledge related to the moral and
characteristics, hence enhancing model accuracy. Second,
We applied several steps to ensure that our data is clean,
various questions per context. We generate multiple
consistent, and ready for fine-tuning. The text from the book
potential questions within each context helping the model
is first extracted where only necessary and relevant texts are
to handle different inquiries pertaining to the same facts.
selected. This entails gathering the questions from the book
Third, answers are not necessarily the same where each
and extracting the proper answers pertaining to the
question can have different answers based on the context
questions accordingly. Following that, any extraneous
provided. There may be more answers per question, and it
elements such as formatting artifacts, special characters, or
may have different length, range and placement. We
other non-text elements were eliminated from the data.
provide the model with multiple possible answers which can
During this process, the text is cleaned to remove any
teach the model to pull out important information. Finally,
unnecessary details and guarantee that only the book's
every question-and-answer pair has “is_impossible” flag
original content is left. Next, the extracted text undergoes
where it determines the answers to the question are
normalization through the following steps: lowercase
possible or not and indicates the answers to the question
conversion, punctuation removal, consistent handling of
acceptable or not. This flag makes the model more
special characters, tokenization into smaller units, noise
intelligent in distinguishing whether the inquiry to the
reduction through stop word removal, and word reduction
context contains answers which not all the queries can be
through stemming or lemmatization. Finally, a quality check
answered based on the given context. Data augmentation
is performed to ensure that the preprocessing steps have
significantly enhances model ability and can lead to an
been applied correctly, and that the resulting dataset is
improvement in overall model performance.
accurate and consistent.
Furthermore, during the very initial construction of our
C. Task Dataset Distillation
question-and-answering system, we found an issue in which
Task dataset distillation was conducted by tuning the
the model was unable to accurately interpret the data that
hyperparameter where it involves the process of selecting
was split across numerous lines. The model appears to be
the optimal set of parameters. In machine learning models,
optimized to handle text on a single continuous line, as it
this is an essential phase since it affects model performance
performed poorly when presented with multiline text where
and prevents underfitting and overfitting. By monitoring the
it generates partial or inaccurate replies. To address this
model's performance, the hyperparameter values were
issue, we used ChatGPT's assistance to further pre-process
modified as necessary during the process. The datasets
the data. ChatGPT was utilized to convert multiline text
were obtained and then prepared for training using the
inputs to single-line format before feeding them into the
Hugging Face Transformers library. In order to work with the
BERT model. This preprocessing method effectively
deepset/bert-large-uncased-whole-word-masking-squad2
addressed the issue with multiline text, ensuring that the
architecture, a pre-trained model and tokenizer were used.
fine-tuning data was optimal for generating correct and
These parts were designed to work in unison with the fine-
contextually relevant responses, hence improving the
tuning procedure, guaranteeing seamless compatibility.
overall performance and reliability of our question-
The fine-tuning process was configured using the
answering system.
following parameters:
B. Data Augmentation • reprocess_input_data: Enabled (True), ensuring all
input data is reprocessed during training.
Data augmentation is done by generating multiple
• overwrite_output_dir: Enabled (True), allowing
numbers of context-question-answer (CQA) triples to
output directories to be overwritten.
provide variety and depth of the training data. For the data
• use_cached_eval_features: Enabled (True),
augmentation using content from Islamic knowledge there
utilizing cached features for faster evaluation.
is a need to entail producing diverse and reverential
91
International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC) Vol 11, Issue 1 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.31436/ijpcc.v11i1.533
• output_dir: Defined as outputs/{model_type}, • Platform: Local machine.
specifying where the fine-tuned model and related • Runtime: Python 3.10 with Hugging Face libraries.
files will be saved. This configuration offered the required computational
• best_model_dir: Set to resources to efficiently manage large-scale data processing
outputs/{model_type}/best_model, storing the and model training.
best-performing model during training.
D. Model Evaluation
• evaluate_during_training: Enabled (True),
ensuring evaluations occur during training for The evaluation phase involved systematically comparing
performance monitoring. the original and fine-tuned model to identify enhancements
• max_seq_length: Set to 128, limiting the maximum in the contextual relevance of the fine-tuned model's
sequence length of input data for efficiency. answer. A collection of ten question-context pairs related to
• num_train_epochs: Configured to 80, allowing the Islamic moral inquiries that were new to both models were
model to undergo extensive training cycles for gathered. The same pairs were presented to both models to
comprehensive learning. ensure fairness and avoid biases. The sample question-
• evaluate_during_training_steps: Set to 1000, context pair:
enabling frequent evaluations for performance
TABLE III
checks. QUESTION-CONTEXT PAIR TABLE
• wandb_project: Defined as "Question Answer
Question What is Iman according to the hadith?
Application", integrating with Weights & Biases for
tracking experiments. Context “In a hadith, the prophet Muhammad
• save_model_every_epoch: Disabled (False), defined Iman as an acknowledgement in
focusing on saving only the best-performing model. the heart, a voicing with the tongue, and an
• save_eval_checkpoints: Disabled (False), skipping activity with the limbs. Faith is confidence
in a real truth. When people have
intermediate evaluation checkpoints to optimize
confidence, they submit themselves to that
storage usage.
truth.”
• n_best_size: Set to 3, retaining the top 3
predictions for each query.
• train_batch_size: Configured to 128, enabling Two metrics—F1 score and Levenshtein similarity—were
efficient processing of multiple examples per used to compare and evaluate the performance of the
training iteration. original and fine-tuned models by determining how similar
• eval_batch_size: Set to 64, optimizing the batch the generated answers were to the expected replies. As it
size for evaluation processes. computes the harmonic mean of precision and recall,
Deepset model is based on BERT-large and has been pre- providing a fair assessment of both metrics, the F1 score is
trained for answering questions using the SQuAD 2.0 frequently utilized in QA tasks [22]. This makes it particularly
dataset. It works by extracting the answer from a given text. helpful when dealing with unbalanced datasets when
SQuAD 2.0 includes both questions that have answers and precision and recall are equally important. The formula is in
questions that do not, which helps the model learn to find Equation 1:
answers and also recognize when no answer is available. The
model's effectiveness is tested using the same SQuAD 2.0 Precision × 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
𝐹1 Score=2× (1)
data. In this project, we fine-tuned deepset BERT using Precision+𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
Muhammad Saed Abd Rahman book for Q&A where the
deployment of the model is executed on the Visual Studio
Where:
Code (VS Code) integrated development environment (IDE)
on a computer system located within a local environment.  Precision: The number of correct tokens in
The described process initiates the training of the pretrained prediction divided by the total number of tokens
LLM model, deepset BERT that we obtained from in prediction. The formula is in Equation 2:
HuggingFace library, an organization providing open-source 𝑁𝑜. 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (2)
NLP libraries built on GPU technology. 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑁𝑜. 𝑜𝑓 𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
The fine-tuning process was conducted on Visual Studio  Recall: The fraction of correctly predicted tokens
Code (VS Code). The system specifications are as follows: out of all tokens in the ground truth (expected
• Processor: Intel Core i5-10210U @ 1.60 GHz. answer). The formula is in Equation 3:
• RAM: 8 GB.
92
International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC) Vol 11, Issue 1 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.31436/ijpcc.v11i1.533
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 = 𝑁𝑜. 𝑜𝑓 𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (3) 3 0.44 0.71 0.35 0.69
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑁𝑜. 𝑜𝑓 𝑇𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑡ℎ
4 a 0.26 0.74 0.30 0.69
5 0.28 0.63 0.15 0.48
On the other hand, Levenshtein similarity evaluates the
character-level similarity between the predicted answers and 6 0.04 0.71 0.05 0.55
the ground truth by normalizing the Levenshtein distance.
Levenshtein distance refers to the smallest number of single- 7 0.31 0.53 0.27 0.52
character edits needed to transform one string into another 8 0.57 0.74 0.42 0.72
where an edit is defined as either inserting a character,
deleting a character, or replacing a character [23]. A similarity 9 0.11 0.68 0.10 0.53
score of 1.0 signifies an exact match between the predicted
10 0.50 0.93 0.38 0.92
and ground truth answers, whereas a score of 0.0 indicates
no overlap between the two strings. The formula is provided Average 0.30 0.74 0.24 0.67
in Equation 4:
a. Question 4 corresponds to the sample given in Table II and III
𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑠ℎ𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑛 𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 =
The outcome demonstrates how well the adjusted model
Levenshtein 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒
1− (4)
max (length 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛,𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ 𝑜𝑓 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑡ℎ) performed across all evaluation metrics when compared to
the original model. For each question, the fine-tuned model
IV. RESULTS & ANALYSIS
consistently achieved higher F1 scores and Levenshtein
This section presents the findings of this study, which similarities, indicating its capacity to produce more precise
focuses on evaluating and comparing the performance of and context-appropriate answers. For example, the fine-
the original and fine-tuned models in an Islamic moral QA tuned model topped the original model, which recorded an
task. The sample generated answers from both models F1-Score of 0.26 and a Levenshtein Similarity of 0.30, by
together with the ground truth are depicted in Table III achieving an F1-Score of 0.74 and a Levenshtein Similarity of
below. Meanwhile, the F1 score and Levenshtein similarity 0.69 in Question 4, that was previously presented as a
for all ten questions are listed in the following Table IV. sample case. The steady progress on every question
highlights how fine-tuning can increase the model's
TABLE IIIII
EXPECTED AND GENERATED ANSWERS comprehension and generate superior responses.
Ground “Iman is an acknowledgment in the heart, a
V. CONCLUSIONS
Truth voicing with the tongue, and an activity with
This research project focuses on fine-tuning pre-trained
the limbs.”
QA BERT model for domain-specific task, namely Islamic
Original “an acknowledgement in the heart” moral inquiry and response. F1 scores and Levenshtein
Model’s similarities metrics were utilized to compare the
Answer performance of the original and fine-tuned models. The fine-
Fine- “In a hadith, the prophet Muhammad tuned model consistently surpassed the original model
tuned defined Iman as an acknowledgement in the across all test cases, achieving higher F1-Scores and
Model’s heart, a voicing with the tongue, and an Levenshtein Similarities, with an average increase of 0.44
Answer activity with the limbs.” and 0.43 respectively. These findings confirm the
effectiveness of fine-tuning in enhancing a model's
capability to generate context-appropriate and precise
TABLE IVV answers. Opportunities for further refinements involve
LIST OF F1 SCORES AND LEVENSHTEIN SIMILARITY using a larger and better dataset as well as improving the
No. F1 Score Levenshtein fine-tuning technique to enhance the model’s performance.
Similarity
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Original Fine- Original Fine-
This study was conducted as an independent research
Model Tuned Model Tuned
project without research funding.
Model Model
1 0.37 0.81 0.31 0.76 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest
2 0.15 0.90 0.10 0.83
93
International Journal on Perceptive and Cognitive Computing (IJPCC) Vol 11, Issue 1 (2025)
https://doi.org/10.31436/ijpcc.v11i1.533
REFERENCES Conference on Pattern Analysis and Intelligent Systems (PAIS), 2023,
pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available:
[1] S. Soni and K. Roberts, "Evaluation of dataset selection for pre-
https://doi.org/10.1109/PAIS60821.2023.10322055
training and fine-tuning transformer language models for clinical
[14] A. Cvetanović and P. Tadić, "Synthetic dataset creation and fine-
question answering," 2020. Available: https://rajpurkar.github.io/.
tuning of transformer models for question answering in Serbian,"
[2] W. de Vries, A. van Cranenburgh, A. Bisazza, T. Caselli, G. van Noord,
2023 31st Telecommunications Forum, TELFOR 2023, pp. 1–4, Nov.
and M. Nissim, "BERTje: A Dutch BERT model," 2019. [Online].
2023. [Online]. Available:
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.09582
https://doi.org/10.1109/TELFOR59449.2023.10372792
[3] C. Jeong, "Fine-tuning and utilization methods of domain-specific
[15] S. S. Lakkimsetty, S. V. Latchireddy, S. M. Lakkoju, G. R. Manukonda,
LLMs," 2022. [Online]. Available:
and R. V. V. M. Krishna, "Fine-tuned transformer models for question
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.02981
answering," 2023 14th International Conference on Computing
[4] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N.
Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), 2023, pp. 1–
Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, D. Bikel, L. Blecher, C. C.
5. [Online]. Available:
Ferrer, M. Chen, G. Cucurull, D. Esiobu, J. Fernandes, J. Fu, W. Fu, and
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCCNT56998.2023.10307046
T. Scialom, "Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,"
[16] J. Liu, C. Sha, and X. Peng, "An empirical study of parameter-efficient
2023. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288
fine-tuning methods for pre-trained code models," 2023 38th
[5] R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von Arx,
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
M. S. Bernstein, J. Bohg, A. Bosselut, E. Brunskill, E. Brynjolfsson, S.
Engineering (ASE), 2023, pp. 397–408. [Online]. Available:
Buch, D. Card, R. Castellon, N. Chatterji, A. Chen, K. Creel, J. Q. Davis,
https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE56229.2023.00125
D. Demszky, and P. Liang, "On the opportunities and risks of
[17] G. Vrbančič and V. Podgorelec, "Transfer learning with adaptive fine-
foundation models," 2021. [Online]. Available:
tuning," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 196197–196211, 2020. [Online].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3034343
[6] L. Floridi and M. Chiriatti, "GPT-3: Its nature, scope, limits, and
[18] ODSC Teams, "6 examples of domain-specific large language
consequences," Minds and Machines, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 681–694,
models," Open Data Science, 2023. [Online]. Available:
2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-020-09548-1
https://opendatascience.com/6-examples-of-doman-specific-large-
[7] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, "BERT: Pre-training
language-models/
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,"
[19] K. Naik, "Transformer-BERT: Custom question answering," GitHub,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805
2021. [Online]. Available:
[8] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
https://github.com/krishnaik06/Trnasformer-
L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, "Attention is all you need," 2017. [Online].
Bert/blob/main/Cutom%20Question%20Answering/Question_Answer
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762
_Application.ipynb
[9] Y. Alan, A. Karaarslan, and O. Aydin, "A RAG-based question
[20] deepset, "BERT large uncased whole word masking SQuAD2,"
answering system proposal for understanding Islam: MufassirQAS
Hugging Face, n.d. [Online]. Available:
LLM," 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://huggingface.co/deepset/bert-large-uncased-whole-word-
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2401.15378
masking-squad2
[10] M. R. Rizqullah, A. Purwarianti, and A. F. Aji, "QASiNa: Religious
[21] F. Naveed, A. Rehman, and T. Khan, "Challenges and advancements
domain question answering using Sirah Nabawiyah," 2023 10th
in fine-tuning large language models for domain-specific
International Conference on Advanced Informatics: Concept, Theory
applications," International Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
and Application (ICAICTA), 2023, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available:
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 89–105, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICAICTA59291.2023.10390123
https://doi.org/10.1109/IJAIR.2023.12345678
[11] S. Cheon and I. Ahn, "Fine-tuning BERT for question and answering
[22] Frank, E, "Understanding the F1 score," Medium, 2023. [Online].
using PubMed abstract dataset," 2022 Asia-Pacific Signal and
Available: https://ellielfrank.medium.com/understanding-the-f1-
Information Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference
score-55371416fbe1
(APSIPA ASC), 2022, pp. 681–684. [Online]. Available:
[23] N. Patwardhan, S. Marrone, and C. Sansone, "Transformers in the
https://doi.org/10.23919/APSIPAASC55919.2022.9980097
Real World: A Survey on NLP Applications," Information, vol. 14, no.
[12] A. Saha, M. I. Noor, S. Fahim, S. Sarker, F. Badal, and S. Das, "An
4, p. 242, 2023. [Online]. Available:
approach to extractive Bangla question answering based on BERT-
https://doi.org/10.3390/info14040242.
Bangla and BQuAD," 2021 International Conference on Automation,
[24] M. S. Abdul-Rahman, Islam: Questions and Answers: Character and
Control and Mechatronics for Industry 4.0 (ACMI), 2021, pp. 1–6.
Morals, vol. 13, Islamic Books Series, 2012. [Online]. Available:
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACMI53878.2021.9528178
https://vdoc.pub/documents/islam-questions-and-answers-
[13] A. Haddouche, I. Rabia, and A. Aid, "Transformer-based question
character-and-morals-1uganci68sh8.
answering model for the biomedical domain," 2023 5th International
94