Journal of
Information Systems Engineering
and Business Intelligence
Vol.9, No.2, October 2023
Available online at: http://e-journal.unair.ac.id/index.php/JISEBI
Fine-Tuning IndoBERT for Indonesian Exam Question
Classification Based on Bloom's Taxonomy
Fikri Baharuddin 1) , Mohammad Farid Naufal 2) *
1,2)Teknik Informatika, University of Surabaya, Surabaya, Indonesia
1)fikribaharuddin@staff.ubaya.ac.id, 2)faridnaufal@staff.ubaya.ac.id
Abstract
Background: The learning assessment of elementary schools has recently incorporated Bloom's Taxonomy, a structure in
education that categorizes different levels of cognitive learning and thinking skills, as a fundamental framework. This assessment
now includes High Order Thinking Skill (HOTS) questions, with a specific focus on Indonesian topics. The implementation of
this system has been observed to require teachers to manually categorize or classify questions, and this process typically requires
more time and resources. To address the associated difficulty, automated categorization and classification are required to
streamline the process. However, despite various research efforts in questions classification, there is still room for improvement
in terms of performance, particularly in precision and accuracy. Numerous investigations have explored the use of Deep
Learning Natural Language Processing models such as BERT for classification, and IndoBERT is one such pre-trained model
for text analysis.
Objective: This research aims to build classification system that is capable of classifying Indonesian exam questions in multiple-
choice form based on Bloom's Taxonomy using IndoBERT pre-trained model.
Methods: The methodology used includes hyperparameter fine-tuning, which was carried out to identify the optimal model
performance. This performance was subsequently evaluated based on accuracy, F1 Score, Precision, Recall, and the time
required for the training and validation of the model.
Results: The proposed Fine Tuned IndoBERT Model showed that the accuracy rate was 97%, 97% F1 Score, 97% Recall, and
98% Precision with an average training time per epoch of 1.55 seconds and an average validation time per epoch of 0.38 seconds.
Conclusion: Fine Tuned IndoBERT model was observed to have a relatively high classification performance, and based on this
observation, the system was considered capable of classifying Indonesian exam questions at the elementary school level.
Keywords: IndoBERT, Fine Tuning, Indonesian Exam Question, Model Classifier, Natural Language Processing, Bloom’s Taxonomy
Article history: Received 25 July 2023, first decision 28 August 2023, accepted 7 October 2023, available online 28 October 2023
I. INTRODUCTION
Critical thinking skills are essential in the field of education, serving as the foundation for all academic pursuits [1].
This skill have been widely assessed by educational institutions through teaching, comprehension, quality evaluation,
and testing, with the aim of facilitating optimal learning among students. During this process, teachers are often
saddled with the responsibility of designing course materials and specific course learning outcomes (CLOs) to
emphasize the thinking abilities of students [2]. To achieve this objective, quality assessments were conducted by
accreditation bodies and regulatory organizations, with exam questions playing a crucial role in the evaluation process.
Furthermore, to facilitate the process, it was established that educational institutions, teachers, and accrediting bodies
require a hierarchical system to distinguish the thinking behaviors of different individuals during learning [3]. In 1956,
Benjamin Bloom introduced classification system known as "Bloom's Taxonomy" to categorize various thinking
behaviors that are crucial in the learning process [4]. Conventionally, the categorization of exam questions into
multiple levels of Bloom's taxonomy was performed manually by teachers and accreditation bodies based on their
expertise on the subject matter. This manual method was time-consuming and susceptible to errors due to human
biases, and based on these challenges, there was a growing need to automate the process, which fell within text
classification. It is important to comprehend that the efficient increase in classification demanding substantial
resources can be effectively addressed through the application of machine learning models. These models have been
found to possess the capacity to grasp the required classification patterns, thereby automating classification process.
Automation, in this context, offers the capability to significantly expedite the task of educators in grouping exam
questions based on the thinking levels in Bloom's Taxonomy. Acknowledging the intricacy of examination questions
* Corresponding author
ISSN 2443-2555 (online) 2598-6333 (print) © 2023 The Authors. Published by Universitas Airlangga.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.20473/jisebi.9.2.253-263
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
is of substantial significance in augmenting the cognitive aptitude of every student. Therefore, disregarding the
difficulty level when organizing questions can lead to issues including questions being overly simple or too difficult
and burdensome.
This research is centered on classification of Indonesian elementary school exam questions, leveraging the
framework of Bloom's Taxonomy to assess the level of cognitive thinking. Within the domain of Machine Learning,
Natural Language Processing (NLP) specializes in language and text data analysis. Meanwhile, Bidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers (BERT) refers to a transformative model designed to pre-train deep bidirectional
representations from unlabeled text, considering context from both left and right sides throughout all layers [5]. BERT
is composed of a multi-layer bidirectional transformer encoder, renowned for its capability to effectively manage
multiple tasks simultaneously [5]. IndoBERT, on the other hand, is a transformer-based model designed in accordance
with BERT architecture, specifically trained as a masked language model using the Huggingface framework, and
configured with the default configuration for BERT-Base (uncased) [6]. It is important to note that this model was
specifically designed for the analysis of Indonesian text. In this research, IndoBERT pre-trained model was used for
model training, which is an extension of the BERT architecture. However, while BERT is widely applied in tasks like
sentiment analysis and article classification, it has been limitedly used for assessing the difficulty of exam questions,
particularly in the context of Indonesian exam. The BERT model was leveraged in this investigation to map questions
weights, thereby enabling their categorization based on the appropriate level within Bloom's Taxonomy. This system
was also used to classify questions based on the verbs contained within. For example, questions containing the word
"complete" were categorized into the C3 taxonomy (application), while some others using the same verb were
classified under the C4 (analysis category). This differentiation underscored the rationale behind the use of the BERT
architecture in this research.
In earlier research [7], the discussion concerning the classification of events revolved around the application of deep
learning methods to categorize incidents shared in Bahasa Indonesia on Twitter. The investigation compared three
different methods and underscored that the combination of CNN with NeuroNER produced the most favorable
outcomes for multi-label classification. This exam also proposed that future research should explore alternative
classification parameters and assess scenarios consisting of data from various sources. Subsequently, another previous
exploration [8] concentrated on enhancing multi-label classification specifically for biomedical data, within the field
of health-related questions-answer systems. This enhancement was implemented by the amalgamation of deep
learning and machine learning methods to boost accuracy. From the obtained results, it was discovered that
heterogeneous ensembles outperformed homogeneous ones, particularly when handling biomedical QA data
characterized by lengthy text dimensions. Both of these prior studies used datasets compiled using Indonesian
language and harnessed machine learning and deep learning methods for text classification. However, it is important
to note that their investigations addressed different contexts compared to the present exploration. The earlier studies
also did not leverage IndoBERT, which offers distinct advantages due to its extensive training in Indonesian text.
Previous research [9] has also been carried out to construct exam questions classifier grounded in Bloom's
Taxonomy. The model designed in the investigation was trained using Word2Vec and TF-IDF methods, but its
accuracy and certain other evaluation metrics remained somewhat low, indicating that there was room for
improvement with the use of more recent methods. This exploration was carried out using an English-language dataset
with a relatively limited sample of 140 data points. Accordingly, classification of exam questions within the context
of Indonesian elementary schools was explored extensively in another previous investigation [10] using a different
method. This classification was established using the REPTree algorithm and executed through the use of WEKA
Tools.
As a novel exploration, this research aims to create classification model that is capable of assessing the difficulty
level of Indonesian elementary school exam questions in line with Bloom's Taxonomy. It is important to understand
that an adept classifier model was developed for categorizing the difficulty of elementary school exam questions in
Indonesia. This model considered the specific aspects of Bloom's Taxonomy, and its classification performance was
significantly improved through the use of fine-tuning configurations.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
In order to effectively achieve the objective of this research, which includes creating a classifier model for
categorizing Indonesian exam questions based on Bloom's Taxonomy, a comprehensive literature review was
conducted. Accordingly, this review included exam of various studies and scientific articles on text classification such
as journals, books, and relevant scientific papers that are in line with the thematic focus of the research.
In the context of questions classification, it was observed that previous research efforts have yielded similar models.
In a particular study [9], three models were developed for classification of English questions grounded in Bloom's
254
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
Taxonomy. The first model used the TF-IDF method, while the second adopted the TF-POSIDF method, a
modification of the basic TF-IDF method. The third model, abbreviated as W2V-TFPOSIDF, was created by
combining Word2Vec and TF-POSIDF. These three models were trained on a dataset comprising 100 data points, and
classification performance with precision ranging from 0.7 to 0.8 was achieved. Another research [10] also focused
on developing a model for classifying the difficulty of exam questions using the REPTree algorithm. However, this
study did not incorporate Bloom's Taxonomy as a reference for classification.
TABLE 1
LITERATURE REVIEW COMPARISON
Dataset Method / Evaluation
Research Author Objectives Accuracy Precision F-Measurement
Size Algorithm Aspect
TF-IDF, TF- Precision,
Mohammed and Omar Questions
141 POSIDF, W2V- Recall, F- - [0,77 – 0.86] [0.724 – 0.837]
[9] Classification
TFPOSIDF measure
Baharuddin and Questions
418 REPTree Accuracy 91.15% - -
Tjahyanto [10] Classification
144,727 Text Fine-tuning
Paul and Saha [11] F-measure - - 94%
Classification BERT
Kaliyar, Goswami, and 20,800 Text
BERT Accuracy 98.90% - -
Narang [12] Classification
Rahmawati, Alamsyah News
2000 IndoBERT Accuracy 90% - -
and Romadhony [13] Classification
Chinese News
Chen and Cong [14] 15200 BERT + CNN Accuracy 98.87% - -
Classification
Indonesian
Rahutomo and Slang Fine-tuning
1101 Accuracy 68% - -
Pardamean [15] Language IndoBERT
Classification
Urdu BERT, Machine
Khan, Amjad, and
9312 Sentiment Learning, Deep F-measure - - 81.49%
Chang [16]
Analysis Learning
BERT, LSTM,
Kulkarni, mandhane, Marathi Text
4779 ULMFiT, CNN, Accuracy 97.48% - -
and Joshi [20] Classification
Bi-LSTM
Several previous investigations have leveraged the BERT architecture to address a variety of data analysis needs in
textual form [17][18][19]. Some have used BERT to create specialized models, such as the CyberBERT model,
designed for cyberbullying detection [11], and others have adapted BERT for classification of fake news [13][12].
BERT is widely used for text classification, and this method has been adopted in numerous research endeavors for the
development of language-specific text classifier models, including Chinese-language news text classification [14],
Indonesian slang for Trading [15], Urdu sentiment analysis [16], and text classification for Marathi [20] using datasets
from [21]. Accordingly, this evidenced the versatility of the BERT architecture in classifying text data across multiple
languages, including Indonesian. Further insights from previous results are presented in Table 1, which provides a
comprehensive overview of the literature studies conducted in this regard.
III. METHODS
The methods leveraged in this study consist of several key stages, including data acquisition, dataset pre-processing,
model training, and tuning, and the evaluation of classifier performance. The detailed research methodology used is
visually presented in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1 Flow of applicated research method in this study
255
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
A. Data Collection
This case study focuses primarily on Indonesian elementary school level exam, and it necessitated the primary data
to be centered around Indonesian exam questions suitable for elementary school students. The input comprised data
extracted from multiple-choice questions. These questions were sourced from various written materials, including test
preparation practice books, study guides, past examinations, and from multiple elementary schools in Sampang
Regency, Madura, Indonesia. In total, 449 data points were compiled from the provided sources. For reference, the
dataset is accessible via [22], and a sample of the collected data is presented in Table 2.
TABLE 2
SAMPLE OF COLLECTED DATA
Data (Bahasa Indonesia) Data (English) Taxonomy
Perbaikan ejaan untuk kata yang ditulis Spelling corrections for words written in
C1 – Knowledge
dalam huruf miring adalah sebagai berikut italics are as follows
Makna yang terkandung dalam kata kias The meaning contained in the figurative
C2 – Understanding
"merah" pada syair di atas adalah word "red" in the above poem is
Kata yang tepat untuk mengganti kata The correct word to replace the word
C3 – Applicating
“penghabis” adalah “ending” is
Nilai moral positif tokoh Reno pada cerita The positive moral values from Reno in
C4 - Analyzing
tersebut adalah the story are
B. Data Labeling
The collected data was systematically categorized and labeled according to the corresponding domains of Bloom's
Taxonomy, as outlined in research [23] sourced from [24]. Bloom's Taxonomy is a widely recognized framework in
educational systems. This framework comprises six distinct aspects namely memorizing or knowledge, understanding,
applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating. Accordingly, the labeling process was conducted manually and
validated by two experienced Indonesian teachers in Sampang Regency. These teachers were responsible for tutoring
Indonesian subjects at the elementary school level for over a decade. The labeling procedure included a discussion
system, with one expert (Expert A) making the labeling decisions, while the other (Expert B) provided reinforcement
and clarification. In cases of disagreement regarding the level of Bloom's Taxonomy, the final label used was based
on the decision of Expert A, given their higher level of expertise and extensive experience in teaching Indonesian
subjects.
As a result of the data collection and labeling process, the data was successfully categorized into four of the six
Bloom's Taxonomy categories. These categories include C1 (Knowledge), C2 (Understanding), C3 (Application), and
C4 (Analysis). However, is important to acknowledge that C5 (Evaluation) and C6 (Creation) were not used in this
research dataset, as the collected data exclusively consisted of multiple-choice questions. The Evaluation and Creation
aspects are typically used to assess the ability of students to respond to essay questions. The division of exam questions
dataset based on Bloom's Taxonomy is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2 Visualization of dataset
256
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
C. Dataset Pre-processing
The application of pre-processing methods to specific datasets makes it possible to significantly enhance text
classification quality, with improvements of up to 80% being achievable [25][26]. The dataset pre-processing phase
comprises various steps, including tokenization, stop words removal, punctuation removal, duplicate removal, and
text case-folding. In this regard, tokenization, refers to the division of sentences into individual words or tokens. Stop
word removal was used to eliminate common and frequently occurring words from the dataset. Punctuation removal
removes punctuation marks such as periods, commas, questions mark, and exclamation points from the text. Duplicate
removal ensures that data is free from redundancy, and text case-folding was performed to standardize all text to
lowercase. These pre-processing steps collectively contributed to refining the dataset for more effective text
classification.
D. Hyperparameter fine-tuning and Model Training
For model training, the IndoBERT pre-trained model was trained using 60% of the obtained data, while the
remaining 40% was used for testing. It is important to establish that IndoBERT shares the same architectural
foundation as the BERT-based model. Based on this understanding, it can be seen that achieving optimal classification
performance requires fine-tuning, and this includes adjusting the hyperparameters used by the optimizer. In the BERT
model, fine-tuning is essentially accomplished by introducing a special token to specify the intended task of the model.
IndoBERT, like BERT, can conduct sequence classification to categorize text based on predefined classes or labels.
The process of sequence classification in this context comprises the use of [SEP] token to demarcate the boundary
between the input sequence and the label. In this research, the [SEP] token was used to separate questions text input,
which subsequently served as the weighted input along with the label/class of questions text. Furthermore, the
inclusion of the [SEP] token helped the model recognize context boundaries more effectively, which eventually led to
higher classification accuracy. Fine-tuning process of the BERT architecture is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3 BERT Pre-training and fine-tuning architecture[5]
Fine-tuning within the BERT architecture has been a prevalent practice in previous studies, as it efficiently plays
the role of enhancing the performance of classifier models. For instance, prior exploration [15] adopted fine-tuning to
build models aimed at understanding Indonesian slang used by stock traders. Similarly, some research have applied
fine-tuning of the BERT architecture to a variety of other models, including sentiment classification[27], fake news
classification [28], and customer review classification[29]. In line previous studies [5], to achieve the most favorable
fine-tuning results, it was recommended to experiment with learning rate values such as 2E-5, 3E-5, and 5E-5 when
using the Adam optimizer. In this study, a comparison of these three recommended learning rate parameter values was
conducted with the aim of determining the optimal model performance. Furthermore, the model training in this
investigation was carried out by using facilities provided by Google Colaboratory with detailed hardware
specifications, as shown in TABLE 3.
257
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
TABLE 3
GOOGLE COLABORATORY RUNTIME ENVIRONMENT
Hardware Specification
CPU Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU @ 2.20GHz
RAM 12.7 GB
GPU Nvidia Tesla T4 16GB
DISK 78.2 GB
E. Performance Evaluation
Model performance evaluation was carried out by paying attention to the values of the accuracy, precision, and
recall of the developed system. Measurement of the level of accuracy was performed using the calculation formula
shown in (1), where accuracy is obtained by dividing the sum result between true positive (TP) and true negative (TN)
with the sum results of true positive (TP), true negative (TF), false positive (FP), and false negative (FN).
     
         = 
           
Precision was calculated using (2), where the precision value was obtained from true positive (TP) divided by the
sum results of true positive (TP) and false positive (FP).
          =
  
2
     
Equation (3) was used to calculate the recall value. From the formula, it can be seen that this value was obtained by
dividing the true positive (TP) by the sum result of the true positive (TP) and false negative (FN).
  
       = (3)
     
Lastly, F-measurement or F-score was calculated using the formula in (4). This value was obtained by dividing the
result of the multiplication of the results of Precision and Recall, with the sum of their results.
          ×      
 1       = (4)
                
The performance of the classifier model was comprehensively evaluated, with specific consideration on the
calculated results of each assessment attribute mentioned earlier. The most favorable classifier model is one that shows
the highest values across all relevant aspects. The evaluation process included the visualization of the level of accuracy
and loss possessed by the model to identify potential issues of overfitting or underfitting.
IV. RESULTS
The pre-processed dataset was trained extensively, as this is necessary for the adequate construction of a classifier
model. Furthermore, in this research, fine-tuning process was implemented to identify the classifier model with the
highest performance. Fine-tuning, in this context, includes adjusting the hyperparameter configurations used during
the model training. The specific hyperparameter settings used in this experiment are detailed in Table 4. It is also
important to establish that the hyperparameter tuning in this investigation focuses solely on the learning rate aspect,
with learning rate values of 2E-5, 3E-5, and 5E-5 being explored.
TABLE 4
HYPERPARAMETER CONFIGURATION FOR TUNING
Hyperparameter
Option
Configuration
Optimizer Adam
Learning Rate 2E-5, 3E-5, 5E-5
Batch Size 32
During the training phase, a callback function was implemented, which disrupted the training process prematurely
if no improvements were observed in the validation accuracy over three consecutive epochs. In the absence of accuracy
improvement, the callback automatically terminated the iterations and retrieved the best-performing data of the model.
258
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
This performance was subsequently evaluated across several aspects of the evaluation matrix, including accuracy, F1
Score, Recall, Precision, time taken per training epoch, and time taken per validation epoch.
In accordance with the evaluation process, the experiment comprising a learning rate parameter of 2E-5 was applied
to the optimizer during model training, the results showed classification performance with a validation accuracy rate
of 97%, F1 Score of 97%, Recall of 97%, and Precision of 98%. On average, it took 1.55 seconds to process one
training epoch and 0.38 seconds to process one validation epoch.
TABLE 5
VALIDATION PERFORMANCE COMPARISON AFTER TUNING
Average Validation
Best F1 Average Training
Learning Rate(LR) Recall Precision Time/Epoch(second
Accuracy Score Time/Epoch(second)
2E – 5 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.98 1.55 0.38
3E – 5 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.94 1.48 0.43
5E – 5 0.94 0.95 0.95 0.95 1.84 0.43
The performance evaluation results presented in Table 5 show that fine-tuning with a learning rate parameter of 2E-
5 produced the highest performance. In addition to assessing the results of the evaluation matrix, selecting the best
model also includes considering the comparison of accuracy and loss observed during the model training process. This
evaluation was carried out to determine whether the resulting model was suffering from overfitting or underfitting
issues. Overfitting, in this context, occurs when a statistical machine learning model learns the training dataset so well
that it performs poorly on unseen datasets, while underfitting happens when the model includes too few predictors
[30].
Fig. 4 provides a comparison of accuracy and loss during the training and validation phases when the model was
trained with the Adam optimizer using a learning rate parameter value of 2E-5. Based on the accuracy comparison,
no evidence of underfitting was observed, as there was no significant decline in accuracy. Moreover, the comparison
of loss levels did not show overfitting, as these levels remained within tolerable limits, and the loss-to-accuracy ratio
sustained relative stability.
(a) (b)
Fig. 4 Tuning model using LR 2E-5 (a) accuracy graph, (b) loss graph
The comparison graph for accuracy and loss in the second fine-tuning experiment, which used a learning rate of
3E-5, is shown in Fig. 5. Based on the accuracy chart, it is evident that no underfitting issues were observed during
the model training process. In accordance with this, the training accuracy consistently increased, which showed
effective training. In the loss chart, the model also did not exhibit signs of overfitting, as the difference in loss ratios
was not excessively significant and remained within acceptable limits. The loss range in this research appeared to be
higher compared to fine-tuning models using the 2E-5 learning rate, but it was still manageable.
259
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
(a) (b)
Fig. 5 Tuning Model using LR 3E-5 (a) Accuracy Graph, (b) Loss Graph
The experiments conducted with learning rates set at 5E-5 showed a comparison of accuracy and loss, as can be
observed in Fig. 6. During this experiment, it was evident that the training accuracy experienced a significant decrease
and the validation accuracy was substantially reduced, showing overfitting. The loss comparison chart shows a
significant increase in validation loss, which surpassed the acceptable tolerance limit. This provides further evidence
that the model in this third experiment experienced overfitting.
(a) (b)
Fig. 6 Tuning Model using Learning Rate 5E-5 (a) Accuracy Graph, (b) Loss Graph
Considering the results from the evaluation metrics and the comparison of accuracy and loss graphs, it becomes
evident that the model trained with a learning rate of 2E-5 stood out as the best-performing model. A separate
validation of this top-performing model was executed by testing its performance using new Indonesian elementary
school exam data. The outcomes of this separate classification test showed excellent classification results, as presented
in Table 6.
V. DISCUSSION
Categorizing exam questions according to cognitive domains, such as Bloom's Taxonomy, has become a widely
adopted method in educational assessment. Consequently, there has been a growing need for a dependable system that
can aid teachers in the automatic, rapid, and accurate grouping of exam questions based on their cognitive levels within
Bloom's Taxonomy. This research focuses on classification of exam questions using the deep learning architecture of
IndoBERT. In line with the experiments conducted in references [12], [13], [20], it becomes evident that deep learning
260
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
methods excel in text classification. This is supported by the obtained classification accuracy results, which reached
an impressive 97% in this research. The results obtained from this comparison are presented in Table 7.
TABLE 6
CLASSIFICATION TEST USING SEPARATED DATASET RESULT
Prediction
Questions Text (Bahasa Indonesia) Questions Text (English) Class Predicted
Accuracy*
Perbaikan penggunaan tanda baca pada kalimat The improvements to the use of
C1 - Pengetahuan 99.325%
di atas adalah punctuation in the sentence above are:
Makna kata pengganti dalam kalimat ini dapat The meaning of the word substitute in
C2 - Pemahaman 93.332%
dijelaskan sebagai this sentence can be explained as
Latar tempat pada cerita tersebut adalah The setting of the story is C4 - Analisis 95.595%
Susunan kalimat yang tepat agar menjadi The proper sentence structure to be a
C3 - Aplikasi 86.133%
paragraf deskripsi adalah description paragraph is
*Optimizer = Adam, Learning Rare = 2E-5, Batch Size = 32, Epoch = 9
TABLE 7
CLASSIFIER MODEL PERFORMANCE COMPARISON
Dataset Methods / Total F1
Rese arch Dataset
Availability Algorithms Dataset
Accuracy
Score
Recall Precision
Fake News BERT +
Kaliyar et al.[12] Public 20800 98% - - -
Dataset CNN
Hoax News
Rahmawati et al.[13] Private IndoBERT 2000 90% 90% 90% 90%
Dataset
Marathi News
Kulkarni et al.[20] Public IndicBERT 4779 99% - - -
Dataset
Indonesian
Exam
Questions with Fine Tuning
Proposed model in this study Public 449 97% 97% 97% 98%
Bloom's IndoBERT
Taxonomy
Dataset
This research underscored the impact of fine-tuning on classifier model performance. Several experiments were
conducted on the learning rate parameter, and three different parameter values, namely 2E-5, 3E-5, and 5E-5, were
tested in line with the recommendations from previous studies [5]. The results of these experiments showed that fine-
tuning IndoBERT with a learning rate parameter of 2E-5 produced the best model performance. This was evident from
the significantly higher accuracy, precision, F-score, and recall results in comparison to the experiments using different
parameter values. Additionally, these results emphasized the substantial influence of the learning rate parameter on
model performance. It was observed that excessively low parameter values can lead to prolonged training times and
the risk of overfitting.
It is important to acknowledge that this research has some limitations. Firstly, the dataset used for model
construction consisted of only 449 data points, which had to be divided into training and validation data at a 60:40
ratio. Secondly, the distribution of data among the labels or classes appears unbalanced, with certain classes having a
dominant amount of data compared to others. In this regard, future research endeavors could benefit from a larger
dataset with a more balanced distribution. Thirdly, the investigation exclusively used multiple-choice exam questions
data, which did not comprise all cognitive aspects of Bloom's Taxonomy. Further studies can explore a broader range
of data, potentially including a combination of multiple-choice questions and essays to include all cognitive aspects
of the used framework.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, through a series of experiments, a classifier model that excels in categorizing Indonesian elementary
school level exam questions based on Bloom's Taxonomy was successfully developed in this research. IndoBERT
pre-trained models in the experiment were fine-tuning, and this process significantly elevated the model performance.
Additionally, it is important to note that the choice of the learning rate parameter in the optimizer during model training
significantly influenced the performance of the classifier. The proposed model was found to possess the potential to
serve as a valuable tool for educators, which can aid in categorizing and classifying exam questions according to the
aspects related to Bloom's Taxonomy at Indonesian elementary school level.
261
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
This exploration possesses certain limitations, first, the dataset used had uneven distribution among the taxonomy
classes, and it was confined to multiple-choice exam questions, leaving some aspects of the leveraged approach
unexplored. Secondly, the dataset exclusively comprised Indonesian language exam questions at the elementary
school level. Thirdly, the investigation exclusively used multiple-choice exam questions data, which did not comprise
all cognitive aspects of Bloom's Taxonomy. Future studies addressing these limitations could benefit from more
comprehensive datasets that cover all aspects of the leveraged framework, along with ensuring a more balanced
distribution of data for each class. Moreover, future investigations may explore the development of models for
different case studies or adopt alternative methods. The model could also be evolved into an integrated application
usable across various platforms for enhanced accessibility.
Author Contributions: Fikri Baharuddin: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data Collection, Writing - Original
Draft. Mohammad Farid Naufal: Methodology, Review, Supervision, Review & Editing.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no specific grant from any funding agency.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Data Availability: The dataset used in this study is publicly accessible. The dataset can be accessed at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8331563.
Informed Consent: There were no human subjects.
Animal Subjects: There were no animal subjects.
ORCID:
Fikri Baharuddin: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2495-5878
Mohammad Farid Naufal: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1194-2760
REFERENCES
[1] N. Omar et al., “Automated analysis of exam questions according to Bloom’s taxonomy,” Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 59,
pp. 297–303, 2012.
[2] W.-C. Chang and M.-S. Chung, “Automatic applying Bloom’s taxonomy to classify and analysis the cognition level of English question
items,” in 2009 Joint Conferences on Pervasive Computing (JCPC), IEEE, 2009, pp. 727–734.
[3] S. U. Monrad et al., “What faculty write versus what students see? Perspectives on multiple-choice questions using Bloom’s taxonomy,” Med
Teach, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 575–582, 2021.
[4] B. S. Bloom and D. R. Krathwohl, Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classification of educational goals. Book 1, Cognitive domain.
longman, 2020.
[5] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
[6] F. Koto, A. Rahimi, J. H. Lau, and T. Baldwin, “IndoLEM and IndoBERT: A benchmark dataset and pre-trained language model for
Indonesian NLP,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.00677, 2020.
[7] S. R. Anggraeni, N. A. Ranggianto, I. Ghozali, C. Fatichah, and D. Purwitasari, “Deep Learning Approaches for Multi-Label Incidents
Classification from Twitter Textual Information.,” Journal of Information Systems Engineering & Business Intelligence, vol. 8, no. 1, 2022.
[8] A. F. Abdillah, P. Putra, C. Bagus, S. Juanita, and D. Purwitasari, “Ensemble-based Methods for Multi-label Classification on Biomedical
Question-Answer Data.,” Journal of Information Systems Engineering & Business Intelligence, vol. 8, no. 1, 2022.
[9] M. Mohammed and N. Omar, “Question classification based on Bloom’s taxonomy cognitive domain using modified TF-IDF and word2vec,”
PLoS One, vol. 15, no. 3, p. e0230442, 2020.
[10] F. Baharuddin and A. Tjahyanto, “Peningkatan Performa Klasifikasi Machine Learning Melalui Perbandingan Metode Machine Learning dan
Peningkatan Dataset,” Jurnal Sisfokom (Sistem Informasi dan Komputer), vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 25–31, 2022.
[11] S. Paul and S. Saha, “CyberBERT: BERT for cyberbullying identification: BERT for cyberbullying identification,” Multimed Syst, vol. 28,
no. 6, pp. 1897–1904, 2022.
[12] R. K. Kaliyar, A. Goswami, and P. Narang, “FakeBERT: Fake news detection in social media with a BERT-based deep learning approach,”
Multimed Tools Appl, vol. 80, no. 8, pp. 11765–11788, 2021.
[13] A. Rahmawati, A. Alamsyah, and A. Romadhony, “Hoax News Detection Analysis using IndoBERT Deep Learning Methodology,” in 2022
10th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoICT), IEEE, 2022, pp. 368–373.
262
Baharudin & Naufal
Journal of Information Systems Engineering and Business Intelligence, 2023, 9 (2), 253-263
[14] X. Chen, P. Cong, and S. Lv, “A long-text classification method of Chinese news based on BERT and CNN,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp.
34046–34057, 2022.
[15] R. Rahutomo and B. Pardamean, “Finetunning IndoBERT to Understand Indonesian Stock Trader Slang Language,” in 2021 1st International
Conference on Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence (ICCSAI), IEEE, 2021, pp. 42–46.
[16] L. Khan, A. Amjad, N. Ashraf, and H.-T. Chang, “Multi-class sentiment analysis of urdu text using multilingual BERT,” Sci Rep, vol. 12, no.
1, p. 5436, 2022.
[17] X. Qiu, T. Sun, Y. Xu, Y. Shao, N. Dai, and X. Huang, “Pre-trained models for natural language processing: A survey,” Sci China Technol
Sci, vol. 63, no. 10, pp. 1872–1897, 2020, doi: 10.1007/s11431-020-1647-3.
[18] H. Lu, L. Ehwerhemuepha, and C. Rakovski, “A comparative study on deep learning models for text classification of unstructured medical
notes with various levels of class imbalance,” BMC Med Res Methodol, vol. 22, no. 1, p. 181, 2022.
[19] A. Esmaeilzadeh and K. Taghva, “Text classification using neural network language model (nnlm) and bert: An empirical comparison,” in
Intelligent Systems and Applications: Proceedings of the 2021 Intelligent Systems Conference (IntelliSys) Volume 3, Springer, 2022, pp. 175–
189.
[20] A. Kulkarni, M. Mandhane, M. Likhitkar, G. Kshirsagar, J. Jagdale, and R. Joshi, “Experimental evaluation of deep learning models for
marathi text classification,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Recent Trends in Machine Learning, IoT, Smart Cities
and Applications: ICMISC 2021, Springer, 2022, pp. 605–613.
[21] D. Kakwani et al., “IndicNLPSuite: Monolingual corpora, evaluation benchmarks and pre-trained multilingual language models for Indian
languages,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, 2020, pp. 4948–4961.
[22] F. Baharuddin, “Elementary School Indonesian Exam Questions with Bloom’s Taxonomy Dataset,” Sep. 2023, doi:
10.5281/ZENODO.8331563.
[23] I. M. Arievitch, “The vision of Developmental Teaching and Learning and Bloom’s Taxonomy of educational objectives,” Learn Cult Soc
Interact, vol. 25, p. 100274, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1016/J.LCSI.2019.01.007.
[24] L. W. Anderson and D. R. Krathwohl, A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational
objectives. Longman, 2021.
[25] Y. HaCohen-Kerner, D. Miller, and Y. Yigal, “The influence of preprocessing on text classification using a bag-of-words representation,”
PLoS One, vol. 15, no. 5, p. e0232525, 2020.
[26] A. Kathuria, A. Gupta, and R. K. Singla, “A Review of Tools and Techniques for Preprocessing of Textual Data,” in Computational Methods
and Data Engineering, V. Singh, V. K. Asari, S. Kumar, and R. B. Patel, Eds., Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2021, pp. 407–422.
[27] M. Munikar, S. Shakya, and A. Shrestha, “Fine-grained sentiment classification using BERT,” in 2019 Artificial Intelligence for Transforming
Business and Society (AITB), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5.
[28] R. Qasim, W. H. Bangyal, M. A. Alqarni, and A. Ali Almazroi, “A fine-tuned BERT-based transfer learning approach for text classification,”
J Healthc Eng, vol. 2022, 2022.
[29] M. Bilal and A. A. Almazroi, “Effectiveness of fine-tuned BERT model in classification of helpful and unhelpful online customer reviews,”
Electronic Commerce Research, pp. 1–21, 2022.
[30] O. A. Montesinos López, A. Montesinos López, and J. Crossa, “Overfitting, Model Tuning, and Evaluation of Prediction Performance,” in
Multivariate Statistical Machine Learning Methods for Genomic Prediction, O. A. Montesinos López, A. Montesinos López, and J. Crossa,
Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 109–139. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-89010-0_4.
Publisher’s Note: Publisher stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
263