BERTnesia: Investigating the capture and forgetting of knowledge in
BERT
JonasWallat JaspreetSingh AvishekAnand
L3SResearchCenter L3SResearchCenter L3SResearchCenter
Hannover,Germany Hannover,Germany Hannover,Germany
wallat@l3s.de singh@l3s.de anand@l3s.de
Abstract specific pattern – like local syntax, long-range
semantics or even compositional reasoning –
Probing complex language models has re- by constructing inputs whose expected output
cently revealed several insights into linguistic
would not be possible to predict without the
andsemanticpatternsfoundinthelearnedrep-
ability to detect that pattern. While a large body
resentations. In this paper, we probe BERT
of work exists on probing BERT for linguistic
specificallytounderstandandmeasurethere-
lational knowledge it captures. We utilize patterns and semantics, there is limited work on
knowledgebasecompletiontaskstoprobeev- probingthesemodelsforthefactualandrelational
ery layer of pre-trained as well as fine-tuned knowledgetheystore.
BERT (ranking, question answering, NER).
Recently, Petroni et al. (2019) probed BERT
Our findings show that knowledge is not just
and other language models for relational knowl-
contained in BERT’s final layers. Intermedi-
edge(e.g.,TrumpisthepresidentoftheUSA)in
atelayerscontributeasignificantamount(17-
60%) to the total knowledge found. Probing ordertodeterminethepotentialofusinglanguage
intermediate layers also reveals how different models as automatic knowledge bases. Their ap-
types of knowledge emerge at varying rates. proach converted queries in the knowledge base
When BERT is fine-tuned, relational knowl- (KB) completion task of predicting arguments or
edgeisforgottenbuttheextentofforgettingis
relations from a KB triple into a natural language
impacted by the fine-tuning objective but not
cloze task, e.g., [MASK] is the president of the
thesizeofthedataset. Wefoundthatranking
USA. This is done to make the query compati-
modelsforgettheleastandretainmoreknowl-
blewiththepre-trainingmaskedlanguagemodel-
edge in their final layer. We release our code
ongithub1torepeattheexperiments. ing(MLM)objective. Theyconsequentlyshowed
that a reasonable amount of knowledge is cap-
1 Introduction tured in BERT by considering multiple relation
probes. However,therearesomenaturalquestions
Large pre-trained language models like
that arise from these promising investigations: Is
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) have heralded
there more knowledge in BERT than what is re-
an Imagenet moment for NLP2 with not only
ported? What happens to relational knowledge
significantimprovementsmadetotraditionaltasks
when BERT is fine-tuned for other tasks? Is
such as question answering and machine transla-
knowledgegainedandlostthroughthelayers?
tion but also in the new areas such as knowledge
base completion. BERT has over 100 million
Our Contribution. In this paper, we study the
parametersandessentiallytradesofftransparency
emergence of knowledge through the layers in
and interpretability for performance. Loosely
BERTbydevisingaproceduretoestimateknowl-
speaking, probing is a commonly used technique
edge contained in every layer and not just the last
to better understand the inner workings of BERT
(as done by Petroni et al. (2019)). While this
and other complex language models (Dasgupta
typeoflayer-by-layerprobinghasbeenconducted
et al., 2018; Ettinger et al., 2018). Probing, in
forsyntactic,grammatical,andsemanticpatterns;
general, is a procedure by which one tests for a
knowledgeprobinghasonlybeenconductedonfi-
1https://github.com/jwallat/knowledge-probing nal layer representations. Observing only the fi-
2https://thegradient.pub/nlp-imagenet/ nal layer (as we will show in our experiments)
(i) underestimates the amount of knowledge and 2.1 Probingforsyntax,semantics,and
(ii)doesnotrevealhowknowledgeemerges. Fur- grammar
thermore,weexplorehowknowledgeisimpacted
Initial work on probing dealt with linguistic pat-
when fine-tuning on knowledge-intensive tasks
terndetection. Petersetal.(2018)investigatedthe
such as question answering and ranking. We list
abilityofvariousneuralnetworkarchitecturesthat
thekeyresearchquestionsweinvestigatedandkey
learn contextualized word representations to cap-
findingscorrespondingtothem:
turelocalsyntaxandlong-rangesemanticslikeco-
reference resolution while Dasgupta et al. (2018);
RQ I: Do intermediary layers capture knowl-
Ettinger et al. (2018) probed language models for
edgenotpresentinthelastlayer? (Section4.1)
compositionalreasoning.
Wefindthatasubstantialamountofknowledge McCoy et al. (2019); Goldberg (2019) found
isstoredintheintermediatelayers(≈ 24%onav- that BERT is able to effectively learn syntactic
erage) heuristicswithnaturallanguageinferencespecific
probes. Tenney et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2019);
RQ II: Does all knowledge emerge at the same
Jawaharetal.(2019)investigatedBERTlayer-by-
rate? Do certain types of relational knowledge
layer for various syntactic and semantic patterns
emergemorerapidly? (Section4.2)
like part-of-speech, named entity recognition, co-
reference resolution, entity type prediction, se-
Wefindthatnotallrelationalknowledgeiscap-
mantic role labeling, etc. They all found that ba-
tured gradually through the layers with 15% of
siclinguisticpatternslikepartofspeechemergeat
relationship types essentially doubling in the last
the lower layers. However, there is no consensus
layer and 7% of relationship types being maxi-
withregardstosemanticswithsomewhatconflict-
mallycapturedinanintermediatelayer.
ing findings (equally spread vs final layer (Jawa-
har et al., 2019)). Kovaleva et al. (2019) found
RQ III: What is the impact of fine-tuning data
that the last layers of fine-tuned BERT contain
onknowledgecapture? (Section4.3)
the most amount of task-specific knowledge. van
We find that the dataset size does not play a Akenetal.(2019)showedthesameresultforfined
major role when the training objective is fixed as tuned QA BERT with specially designed probes.
MLM. Fine-tuning on a larger dataset does not Theyfoundthatthelowerandintermediarylayers
leadtolessforgetting. werebettersuitedtolinguisticsubtasksassociated
withQA.Foracomprehensivesurveywepointthe
RQ IV: What is the impact of the fine tuning
readerto(Rogersetal.,2020)
objectiveonknowledgecapture? (Section4.4)
Our work is similar to these studies in terms of
setup. In particular, our probes function on the
Finetuningalwayscausesforgetting. Whenthe
sentence level and are applied to each layer of a
size of the dataset is fixed and training objective
pre-trained BERT model as well as BERT fine-
varies, the ranking model (RANK-MSMARCO in
tuned on several tasks. However, we do not focus
ourexperiments)forgetslessthantheQAmodel.
on detecting linguistic patterns and focus on rela-
tionalandfactualknowledge.
2 RelatedWork
2.2 Probingforknowledge
In this section, we survey previous work on prob-
ing language models (LMs) with a particular fo- In parallel, there have been investigations into
cus on contextual embeddings learned by BERT. probing for factual and world knowledge. Most
Probeshavebeendesignedforbothstaticandcon- recently, Petroni et al. (2019) found that LMs
textualized word representations. Static embed- like BERT can be directly used for the task of
dings refer to non-contextual embeddings such as knowledge base completion since they are able to
GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014). For the static memorizemorefactsthansomeautomaticknowl-
case, the reader can refer to this survey by Be- edge bases. They created cloze statement tasks
linkov and Glass (2019). Now we detail prob- forfactualandcommonsenseknowledgeandmea-
ingtasksforcontextualizedembeddingsfromlan- sured cloze-task performance as a proxy for the
guagemodels. knowledge contained. However, using the same
probing framework, Kassner and Schu¨tze (2020) 1(Rajpurkaretal.,2016). Thetrainedmodel
showed that this factoid knowledge is influenced achievedanF1scoreof88.5onthetestset.
by surface-level stereotypes of words. For ex-
ample, BERT often predicts a typically German
3. QA-SQUAD-2: QA span prediction trained
Squad 2 (Rajpurkar et al., 2018). The F1
name as a German citizen. Tangentially, Forbes
scorewas67(note: SQUAD2isamorechal-
et al. (2019) investigated BERT’s awareness of
lengingversionofSQUAD1).
the world. They devised object property and ac-
tion probes to estimate BERT’s ability to reason
4. RANK-MSMARCO: Ranking model
about the physical world. They found that BERT
trained on the MSMarco passage reranking
isrelativelyincapableofsuchreasoningbutisable
task (Nguyen et al., 2016). We used the
to memorize some properties of real-world ob-
fine-tuningproceduredescribedin(Nogueira
jects. Thisinvestigationtestedcommonsensespa-
and Cho, 2019) to obtain a regression model
tialreasoningratherthanpurefactoidknowledge.
that predicts a relevance score given query
Rather than focusing on newer knowledge
andpassage.
types, we focus on the true coverage of already
known relations and facts in BERT. In terms 5. MLM-MSMARCO: BERT fine-tuned on the
of experiments, we do not focus on knowledge passages from the MSMarco dataset using
containment in different language models, rather the masked language modeling objective as
focus on investigating how knowledge emerges per (Devlin et al., 2019). 15% of the tokens
specifically in BERT. Here, we are more inter- maskedatrandom.
ested in relative differences. To this end, we de-
vise a procedure to adapt the layerwise probing 6. MLM-SQUAD: BERT fine-tuned on text
methodologyoftenemployedforlinguisticpattern from SQUAD using the masked language
detectionby vanAkenetal.(2019);Tenneyetal. modeling objective as per Devlin et al.
(2019); Liu et al. (2019) for the probe tasks sug- (2019). 15%ofthetokensmaskedatrandom.
gestedinPetronietal.(2019).
When fine-tuning, our goal was to not only
3 ExperimentalSetup achieve good performance but also to minimize
the number of extra parameters added. More pa-
3.1 Models
rameters outside BERT may increase the chance
BERT is a bidirectional text encoder built by of knowledge being stored elsewhere leading to
stacking several transformer layers. BERT is of- unreliable measurement. We used the Hug-
tenpre-trainedwithtwotasks: nextsentenceclas- gingface transformers library (Wolf et al., 2019)
sificationandmaskedlanguagemodeling(MLM). for implementing all models in our experiments.
MLM is cast as a classification task over all to- Moredetailsonhyperparametersandtrainingcan
kens in the vocabulary. It is realized by train- befoundintheAppendix.
ing a decoder that takes as input the mask to-
3.2 Knowledgeprobes
kenembeddingandoutputsaprobabilitydistribu-
tion over vocabulary tokens. In our experiments We utilized the existing suite of LAMA knowl-
we used BERT base (12 layers) pretrained on edgeprobessuggestedin(Petronietal.,2019)3for
the BooksCorpus (Zhu et al., 2015) and English our experiments. Table 1 briefly summarizes the
Wikipedia. We use this model for fine-tuning to keydetails. Theprobesaredesignedasclozestate-
keep comparisons consistent. Henceforth, we re- ments and limited to single token factual knowl-
fer to pre-trained BERT as just BERT. The fol- edge,i.e.,multi-wordentitiesandrelationsarenot
lowingisalistofallfine-tunedmodelsusedinour included.
experiments: Each probe in LAMA is constructed to test a
specific relation or type of relational knowledge.
1. NER-CONLL:(cased)namedentityrecogni-
ConceptNetisdesignedtotestforgeneralcon-
tion model tuned on Conll-2003 (Sang and
ceptualknowledgesinceitmaskssingletokenob-
Meulder,2003).
jects from randomly sampled sentences whereas
T-REx consists of hundreds of sentences for 41
2. QA-SQUAD-1: A question answering
model (span prediction) trained on SQuAD 3https://github.com/facebookresearch/LAMA
Name #Rels #Instances Example Answer
ConceptNet - 12514 Rocksare[MASK]. solid
T-REx 41 34017 ThecapitalofGermanyis[MASK]. Berlin
Google-RE 3 5528 EyolfKlevenwasbornin[MASK]. Copenhagen
Squad - 305 NathanAltermanwasa[MASK]. Poet
Table1: Knowledgeprobesusedintheexperiments. Petronietal.(2019)subsampledConceptNet(Speerand
Havasi,2012),T-REx(ElSaharetal.,2018),Google-RE(Orr,2013)andSquad(Rajpurkaretal.,2016).
specific relationship types like member of and theAdamoptimizer(KingmaandBa,2015). With
language spoken. Google-RE tests for 3 spe- thenewdecodingheads,theLAMAprobescanbe
cifictypesoffactualknowledgerelatedtopeople: appliedtoeverylayer.
place-of-birth (2937), date-of-birth (1825), and
Measuring Knowledge We convert the probabil-
place-of-death (766 instances). The date-of-birth
ity distribution output of the decoding head to a
is a strict numeric prediction that is not covered
ranking with the most probable token at rank 1.
by T-REx. Finally, Squad uses context insensi-
The amount of knowledge stored at each layer is
tive questions from SQuAD that has been manu-
measured by precision at rank 1 (P@1 for short).
ally rewritten to cloze-style statements. Note that
We use P@1 as the main metric in all our experi-
thisisthesamedatasetusedtotrainQA-SQUAD-
ments. Sincerankdepthof1isastrictmetric,we
1 and QA-SQUAD-2.
also measured P@10 and P@100. We found the
trends to be similar across varying rank depths.
3.3 ProbingProcedure
For completeness, results for P@10 and P@100
Our goal is to measure the knowledge stored in can be found in the appendix. Additionally, we
BERT viaknowledgeprobes. LAMAprobesrely measurethetotalamountofknowledgecontained
on the MLM decoding head to complete cloze in BERT by
statement tasks. Note that this decoder is only
trained for the mask token embedding of the fi- P@1 = max({Pl@1| ∀l ∈ L})
nal layer and is unsuitable if we want to probe all
layersof BERT.Toovercomethiswetrainanew where L is the set of all layers and Pl@1 is
decoding head for each layer of a BERT model the P@1 for a given layer l. In our experiments
underinvestigation. |L| = 12. This metric allows us to consider
knowledgecapturedatalllayersofBERT,notjust
Training: Wetrainanewdecodingheadforeach a specific layer. If knowledge is always best cap-
layer the same way as standard pre-training us- tured at one specific layer l then P@1 = Pl@1.
ing MLM. We also used Wikipedia (WikiText-2 Ifthelastlayeralwayscontainsthemostinforma-
data)–samplingpassagesatrandomandthenran- tion then total knowledge is equal to the knowl-
domly masking 15% of the tokens in each. Our edgestoredinthelastlayer.
decoding head uses the same architecture as pro-
Caveats of probing with cloze statements:
posed by Devlin et al. (2019) – a fully connected
Note that BERT, MLM-MSMARCO, and MLM-
layer with GELU activation and layer norm (ep-
SQUAD are trained for the task of masked word
silon of 1e-12) resulting in a new 768 dimension
prediction which is exactly the same task as our
embedding. Thisembeddingisthenfedtoalinear
probes. The last layers of BERT have shown to
layerwithsoftmaxactivationtooutputaprobabil-
contain mostly task-specific knowledge – how to
itydistributionoverthe30Kvocabularyterms. In
predict the masked word in this case (Kovaleva
total, the decoding head possesses ∼24M param-
et al., 2019). Hence, good performance in our
eters. We froze BERT’s parameters and trained
probes at the last layers for MLM models can be
the the decoding head only for every layer using
partiallyattributedtotask-basedknowledge.
the same training data. We initialized the new
decoding heads with the parameters of the pre-
4 Results
traineddecodingandthenfine-tunedit. Ourexper-
iments with random initialization yielded no sig- In contrast to existing work, we want to analyze
nificant difference. We used a batch size of 8 and relation knowledge across layers to measure the
trained until validation loss was minimized using total knowledge contained in BERT and observe
the evolution of relational knowledge through the We observe that the amount of relational
layers. knowledge captured increases steadily with
each additional layer. While some relations are
4.1 IntermediateLayersMatter
easier to capture early on, we see an almost-
The first question we tackle is – Does knowledge exponential growth of relational knowledge after
residestrictlyinthelastlayerof BERT? Layer 8. This indicates that relational knowl-
Figure 1 compares the fraction of correct pre- edge is predominantly stored in the last few lay-
dictions in the last layer as against all the correct ers as against low-level linguistic patterns are
predictions computed at any intermediate layer in learned at the lower layers (similar to van Aken
terms of P@1. It is immediately evident that a et al. (2019)). In Figure 3 we inspect relationship
significant amount of knowledge is stored in the types that show uncharacteristic growth or loss in
intermediatelayers. Whilethelastlayerdoescon- T-REx.
tain a reasonable amount of knowledge, a con- Whilemember ofisforgotteninthelastlay-
siderable proportion of relations seem to be for- ers, the relation diplomatic relation is
gotten and the intermediate layers contain re- neverlearnedatall,andofficial language
lational knowledge that is absent in the fi- ofisonlyidentifiableinthelasttwolayers. Note
nal layer. Specifically, 18% for T-REx and
thatthemajorityofrelationsfollowthenearlyex-
33% approximately for the others are forgotten
ponential growth curve of the mean performance
by BERTs last layer. For instance, the answer in Figure 2 (see line T-REx). From our calcula-
to Rocky Balboa was born in [MASK]
tions, nearly 15% of relationship types double in
is correctly predicted as Philadelphia by
meanP@1atthelastlayer.
Layer 10 whereas the rank of Philadelphia
We now analyze evolution in fine-tuned mod-
inthelastlayerdropsto26for BERT.
els to understand the impact of fine-tuning on the
The intermediary layers also matter for fine-
knowledge contained through the layers. There
tunedmodels. ModelswithhighP@1tendtohave
are two effects at play once BERT is fine-tuned.
a smaller fraction of knowledge of stored in the
First, during fine-tuning BERT observes addi-
intermediatelayers–20%forRANK-MSMARCO
tional task-specific data and hence has either op-
on T-REx. In other cases, the amount of knowl-
portunity to monotonically increase its relational
edgelostinthefinallayerismoredrastic–3×for
knowledge or replace relational knowledge with
QA-SQUAD-2 onGoogle-RE.
more task-specific information. Second, the task-
We also measured the fraction of relationship
specificlossfunctionmightbemisalignedwiththe
types in T-REx that are better captured in the in-
MLM probing task. This means that fine-tuning
termediary layers (Table 2). On average, 7% of
might result in difficulties in retrieving the actual
all relation types in T-REx are forgotten in the
knowledgeusingtheMLMhead. Inthefollowing,
last layer for BERT. RANK-MSMARCO forgets
we first look at the overall results and then focus
the least amount of relation types (2%) whereas
onspecificeffectsthereafter.
QA-SQUAD-1forgetsthemost(43%)inT-REx,
Figure4showstheevolutionofknowledgein3
while also being the least knowledgeable (lowest
differentmodelswhencomparedto BERT.
or second-lowest P@1 in all probes). This is fur-
All models possess nearly the same amount of
therproofofourclaimthatBERT’soverallcapac-
knowledge until layer 6 but then start to grow
ity can be better estimated by probing all layers.
Surprisingly, RANK-MSMARCO is able to con-
at different rates. Most surprisingly, RANK-
sistently store nearly all of its knowledge in the
MSMARCO’s evolution is closest to BERT
whereas the other models forget information
last layer. We postulate that for ranking in partic-
rapidly. With previous studies indicating that the
ular, relational knowledge is a key aspect of the
last layers make way for task-specific knowledge
task specific knowledge commonly found in the
(Kovalevaetal.,2019), therankingmodelcanre-
lastlayers.
tainalargeramountofknowledgewhencompared
4.2 RelationalKnowledgeEvolution tootherfine-tuningtasksinourexperiments.
Next, we study the evolution of relational knowl- These results raise the question: Is RANK-
edge through the BERT layers presented in Fig- MSMARCO able to retain more knowledge be-
ure2thatreportsP@1atdifferentlayers. causeMSMarcoisabiggerdatasetorisitbecause
Figure1: P@k(uppervalue)vslastlayerP@k(lowervalue)forallmodelsforeachLAMAprobe.
4.3 Effectoffine-tuningdata
To isolate the effect of the fine-tuning dataset,
we first fix the fine-tuning objective. We exper-
imented with an MLM and a QA span predic-
tionobjective. ForMLM,weusedmodelstrained
on fine-tuning task data of varying size – BERT,
MLM-MSMARCO (∼ 8.8 million unique pas-
Figure2: MeanP@1ofBERTacrossalllayers.
sages) and MLM-SQUAD (∼ 500+ unique arti-
cles). FortheQAobjective,weexperimentedwith
QA-SQUAD-1 and QA-SQUAD-2 which utilize
thesamedatasetofpassagesbutQA-SQUAD-2is
trainedon50Kextraunanswerablequestions.
Figure 1 shows the total knowledge and Fig-
ure 5 shows the evolution of knowledge for both
MLM models as compared to BERT. When fine-
tuning, BERT seemingly tends to forget some
relational knowledge to accommodate for more
domain-specificknowledge. Wesuspectitforgets
Figure 3: P@1 across all layers for BERT for select certainrelations(foundintheprobe)tomakeway
relationshiptypesfromT-REx. forotherknowledgenotdetectablebyourprobes.
Inthecasewheretheprobeisalignedwiththefine
tuningdata(Squad), MLM-SQUAD learnsmore
aboutitsdomainandoutperforms BERT butonly
by a small margin (< 5%). Even though MLM-
MSMARCOusesadifferentdatasetitisabletore-
tain a similar level of knowledge in Squad. The
evolution trends in Figure 5 further confirm that
fine tuning leads to forgetting mostly in the last
layers. Sincethefinetuningobjectiveandprobing
tasksarealigned,itismoreevidentintheseexper-
imentsthatrelationalknowledgeisbeingforgotten
Figure4: Knowledgecontainedperlayermeasuredin
orreplaced.
termsofP@1onT-REx.
When observing P@1 and P@1, accord-
ing to T-REx and Google-RE in particular,
therankingobjectiveisbettersuitedtoknowledge MLM-MSMARCO forgets a large amount of
retentionascomparedtoQA,MLMorNER? knowledge but retains common sense knowledge
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure5: Effectofdatasetsize. MeanP@1acrosslayersforBERT,MLM-MSMARCOandMLM-SQUAD.
(a)ConceptNet
(b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure6: Effectofdatasetsize. MeanP@1acrosslayersforQA-SQUAD-1andQA-SQUAD-2.
(ConceptNet). MLM-SQUAD contains sub- Models P@1 P@10 P@100
BERT 0.07 0.02 0.07
stantially more knowledge overall according to
QA-SQUAD-1 0.43 0.38 0.38
2/4 probes and nearly the same in the others QA-SQUAD-2 0.17 0.19 0.17
as compared to MLM-MSMARCO. Seemingly, MLM-SQUAD 0.12 0.07 0.07
RANK-MSMARCO 0.02 0.05 0.05
the amount of knowledge contained in fine tuned
MLM-MSMARCO 0.10 0.10 0.14
models is not directly correlated with the size of NER-CONLL 0.26 0.33 0.43
thedataset. Therecanbeseveralcontributingfac-
Table 2: Fraction of relationship types (of the 41
tors to this phenomenon potentially related to the
T-REx) that are forgotten in the last layer. If mean
datadistributionandalignmentoftheprobeswith
P12@1 < mean Pl@1 for a particular relation type
thefinetuningdata. Weleavetheseavenuesopen then that relation is considered to be forgotten at the
tofuturework. lastlayer.
Considering the QA span prediction objective,
we first see that the total amount of knowledge
stored (P@1) in QA-SQUAD-2 is higher for 3/4 periments where we fixed the dataset and com-
knowledge probes (from Figure 1). Figure 6 pared the MLM objective (MLM-MSMARCO)
shows the evolution of knowledge captured for vs the ranking objective RANK-MSMARCO and
QA-SQUAD-1vsQA-SQUAD-2. QA-SQUAD- MLM-SQUAD vs the span prediction objective
2 capturesmoreknowledgeatthelastlayerin3/4 (QA-SQUAD-2). Figure 8 shows the evolution
probes with both models showing similar knowl- of knowledge captured for MLM-MSMARCO vs
edge emergence trends. This result hints to the RANK-MSMARCO.
fact that a more difficult task (SQUAD2) on the We observe that RANK-MSMARCO performs
same dataset forces BERT to remember more re- quite similar to MLM-MSMARCO across all
lational knowledge in its final layers as compared probes and layers. Although MLM-MSMARCO
to the relatively simpler SQUAD1. This point is has the same training objective as the probe, the
further emphasized in Table 2. Only 17% of rela- ranking model can retain nearly the same amount
tion types are better captured in the intermediary of knowledge. We hypothesize that this is be-
layers of QA-SQUAD-2 as compared to 43% for cause the downstream fine-tuning task is sensi-
QA-SQUAD-1. tive to relational information. Specifically, rank-
ing passages for open-domain QA is a task that
4.4 Effectoffinetuningobjective
relies heavily on identifying pieces of knowledge
The second effect that we previously discussed that are strongly related – For example, given
is the effect of the task objective function that the query: How do you mow the lawn?, RANK-
might be misaligned with the probing proce- MSMARCO must effectively identify concepts
dure. To study this effect, we conducted 2 ex- andrelationsincandidatepassagesthatarerelated
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure7: EffectofFine-TuningObjectiveonfixedsizedata: SQUAD.
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure8: EffectofFine-TuningObjectiveonfixedsizedata: MSMarco.
tolawnmowing(liketypesofgrassandlawnmow- tain more factual knowledge (MLM-MSMARCO
ers)toestimaterelevance. < MLM-SQUAD as measured by P@1). In-
Reading comprehension /span prediction (QA) stead, we find that knowledge-intensive tasks like
however seems to be a less knowledge-intensive ranking do mitigate forgetting compared to span
task both in terms of total knowledge and at the prediction. Although the fine-tuned models al-
last layer (Figure 1). In Figure 7 we see that the wayscontainlessknowledge,withsignificant(and
final layers are the most impacted here as well. expected) forgetting in the last layers, RANK-
FromTable2weobservethat MLM-SQUAD for- MSMARCO remembers relatively more relation-
getslessinitsfinallayer(12%vs17%),withQA- shiptypesthanBERT(2%vs7%forgotten)inits
SQUAD-2 seemingly forgoing relational knowl- last layer (Table 2). This result can partially ex-
edgeforspanpredictiontaskknowledge. plain findings in Chang et al. (2019) where they
found that pretraining BERT with inverse cloze
5 DiscussionandConclusion tasks aids it’s transferability to a retrieval and
rankingsetting. Essentially,rankingtasksencour-
In this paper, we introduce a framework to probe age the retention of factual knowledge (as mea-
all layers of BERT for knowledge. We exper- sured by cloze tasks) since they are seemingly
imented on a variety of probes and fine-tuning required for reasoning between the relative rele-
tasksandfoundthat BERT containsmoreknowl- vanceofdocumentstoaquery.
edge than was reported earlier. Our experiments Our results have direct implications on the
shed light on the hidden knowledge stored in use of BERT as a knowledge base. By ef-
BERT and also some important implications to fectively choosing layers to query and adopting
model building. Since intermediate layers con- earlyexitingstrategiesknowldgebasecompletion
tain knowledge that is forgotten by the final lay- can be improved. The performance of RANK-
ers to make way for task-specific knowledge, our MSMARCO also warrants further investigation
probingprocedurecanmoreaccuratelycharacter- into ranking models with different training objec-
izetheknowledgestored. tives – pointwise (regression) vs pairwise vs list-
We show that factual knowledge, like syntac- wise. More knowledge-intensive QA models like
tic and semantic patterns, is also forgotten at the answer generation models may also show a simi-
last layers due to fine-tuning. However, the last lartrendasrankingtasksbutrequireinvestigation.
layercanalsomakewayformoredomainspecific We also believe that our framework is well suited
knowledge when the fine tuning objective is the tostudyingvariantsofBERTarchitectureandpre-
same as the pretraining objective (MLM) as ob- trainingmethods.
served in Squad. Interestingly, forgetting is not
mitigatedbylargerdatasetswhichpotentiallycon-
References commonsense? In Proceedings of the 41th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, CogSci
Betty van Aken, Benjamin Winter, Alexander Lo¨ser,
2019: Creativity+Cognition+Computation,Mon-
and Felix A. Gers. 2019. How does BERT answer
treal, Canada, July24-27, 2019, pages1753–1759.
questions?: A layer-wise analysis of transformer
cognitivesciencesociety.org.
representations. InProceedingsofthe28thACMIn-
ternational Conference on Information and Knowl-
YoavGoldberg.2019. Assessingbert’ssyntacticabili-
edge Management, CIKM 2019, Beijing, China,
ties. CoRR,abs/1901.05287.
November3-7,2019,pages1823–1832.ACM.
Ganesh Jawahar, Benoˆıt Sagot, and Djame´ Seddah.
YonatanBelinkovandJamesR.Glass.2019. Analysis
2019. WhatdoesBERTlearnaboutthestructureof
methods in neural language processing: A survey.
language? InProceedingsofthe57thAnnualMeet-
InProceedingsofthe2019ConferenceoftheNorth
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tics, pages 3651–3657, Florence, Italy. Association
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
forComputationalLinguistics.
NAACL-HLT2019,Minneapolis,MN,USA,June2-
7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
NoraKassnerandHinrichSchu¨tze.2020. Negatedand
3348–3354.AssociationforComputationalLinguis-
misprimed probes for pretrained language models:
tics.
Birdscantalk,butcannotfly. InProceedingsofthe
58thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforCompu-
Wei-ChengChang,XYuFelix,Yin-WenChang,Yim-
tational Linguistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10,
ing Yang, and Sanjiv Kumar. 2019. Pre-training
2020, pages 7811–7818. Association for Computa-
tasks for embedding-based large-scale retrieval. In
tionalLinguistics.
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A
method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd Inter-
Ishita Dasgupta, Demi Guo, Andreas Stuhlmu¨ller,
national Conference on Learning Representations,
Samuel Gershman, and Noah D. Goodman. 2018.
ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Evaluating compositionality in sentence embed-
ConferenceTrackProceedings.
dings. InProceedingsofthe40thAnnualMeetingof
the Cognitive Science Society, CogSci 2018, Madi-
Olga Kovaleva, Alexey Romanov, Anna Rogers, and
son,WI,USA,July25-28,2018.cognitivescienceso-
AnnaRumshisky.2019. Revealingthedarksecrets
ciety.org.
ofBERT. InProceedingsofthe2019Conferenceon
EmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Nat-
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: pre-training of
ural Language Processing, EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019,
deepbidirectionaltransformersforlanguageunder-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference Hong Kong, China, November 3-7, 2019, pages
of the North American Chapter of the Association 4364–4373.AssociationforComputationalLinguis-
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language tics.
Technologies,NAACL-HLT2019,Minneapolis,MN,
Nelson F. Liu, Matt Gardner, Yonatan Belinkov,
USA,June2-7,2019,Volume1(LongandShortPa-
MatthewE.Peters,andNoahA.Smith.2019. Lin-
pers), pages 4171–4186. Association for Computa-
guistic knowledge and transferability of contextual
tionalLinguistics.
representations. InProceedingsofthe2019Confer-
Hady ElSahar, Pavlos Vougiouklis, Arslen Remaci, ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
Christophe Gravier, Jonathon S. Hare, Fre´de´rique ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
Laforest, and Elena Simperl. 2018. T-rex: A large guageTechnologies,NAACL-HLT2019,Minneapo-
scalealignmentofnaturallanguagewithknowledge lis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and
base triples. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Inter- Short Papers), pages 1073–1094. Association for
national Conference on Language Resources and ComputationalLinguistics.
Evaluation, LREC 2018, Miyazaki, Japan, May 7-
12, 2018. European Language Resources Associa- Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019.
tion(ELRA). Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic
heuristics in natural language inference. In Pro-
AllysonEttinger,AhmedElgohary,ColinPhillips,and ceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association
PhilipResnik.2018. Assessingcompositioninsen- forComputationalLinguistics,ACL2019,Florence,
tence vector representations. In Proceedings of Italy, July28- August 2, 2019, Volume1: Long Pa-
the27thInternationalConferenceonComputational pers, pages 3428–3448. Association for Computa-
Linguistics,pages1790–1801,SantaFe,NewMex- tionalLinguistics.
ico, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao,
Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and Li Deng.
MaxwellForbes,AriHoltzman,andYejinChoi.2019. 2016. MS MARCO: A human generated machine
Do neural language representations learn physical reading comprehension dataset. In Proceedings
of the Workshop on Cognitive Computation: Inte- R. Speer and Catherine Havasi. 2012. Represent-
grating neural and symbolic approaches 2016 co- ing general relational knowledge in conceptnet 5.
located with the 30th Annual Conference on Neu- In Proceedings of the Eighth International Confer-
ral Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), enceonLanguageResourcesandEvaluation,LREC
Barcelona, Spain, December9, 2016, volume1773 2012, Istanbul, Turkey, May 23-25, 2012, pages
ofCEURWorkshopProceedings.CEUR-WS.org. 3679–3686.EuropeanLanguageResourcesAssoci-
ation(ELRA).
RodrigoNogueiraandKyunghyunCho.2019. Passage
re-rankingwithBERT. CoRR,abs/1901.04085. Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. 2019.
BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline. In
DaveOrr.2013. 50,000lessonsonhowtoread: are- Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Asso-
lation extraction corpus. Online: Google Research ciation for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019,
Blog,11. Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume
1: Long Papers, pages 4593–4601. Association for
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo- ComputationalLinguistics.
pher D. Manning. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for
word representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan- Chaumond,ClementDelangue,AnthonyMoi,Pier-
guage Processing, EMNLP 2014, October 25-29, ricCistac, TimRault, Re´miLouf, MorganFuntow-
2014,Doha,Qatar,AmeetingofSIGDAT,aSpecial icz, and Jamie Brew. 2019. Huggingface’s trans-
InterestGroupoftheACL,pages1532–1543.ACL. formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. CoRR,abs/1910.03771.
MatthewE.Peters,MarkNeumann,LukeZettlemoyer,
andWen-tauYih.2018. Dissectingcontextualword Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Richard S. Zemel, Ruslan
embeddings: Architecture and representation. In Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba,
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical andSanjaFidler.2015. Aligningbooksandmovies:
MethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing,Brussels, Towards story-like visual explanations by watching
Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018, pages movies and reading books. In 2015 IEEE Interna-
1499–1509.AssociationforComputationalLinguis- tionalConferenceonComputerVision,ICCV2015,
tics. Santiago, Chile, December 7-13, 2015, pages 19–
27.IEEEComputerSociety.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rockta¨schel, Sebastian Riedel,
Patrick S. H. Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu,
and Alexander H. Miller. 2019. Language mod-
els as knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP-IJCNLP2019,HongKong,China,Novem-
ber 3-7, 2019, pages 2463–2473. Association for
ComputationalLinguistics.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
tionsforsquad. CoRR,abs/1806.03822.
PranavRajpurkar,JianZhang,KonstantinLopyrev,and
PercyLiang.2016. Squad: 100,000+questionsfor
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the2016ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNat-
ural Language Processing, EMNLP 2016, Austin,
Texas,USA,November1-4,2016,pages2383–2392.
TheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics.
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky.
2020. Aprimerinbertology: Whatweknowabout
howBERTworks. CoRR,abs/2002.12327.
Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder.
2003. Introduction to the conll-2003 shared task:
Language-independentnamedentityrecognition. In
Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Natural
Language Learning, CoNLL 2003, Held in cooper-
ation with HLT-NAACL 2003, Edmonton, Canada,
May31-June1,2003,pages142–147.ACL.
6 Appendix • Average runtime: Circa 3 hours per layer
(that is training the MLM head and probing
6.1 Models
theLAMAprobes)onasingleGPU.
• BERT: Off the shelf ”bert-base-uncased”
• Number of parameters: Since we use stan-
from the huggingface transformers library
dard BERT, the base model + MLM head
(Wolfetal.,2019)
combinedhave110,104,890parameters. The
MLMheaditselfhas24,459,834parameters.
• QA-SQUAD-1: Both SQuAD QA models
aretrainedwiththehuggingfacequestionan-
• Validationperformancefortestresults: Since
swering training script 4. This adds a span
we probed the data, we could not do valida-
prediction head to the default BERT, I.e. a
tiononit.
linear layer that computes logits for the span
start and span end. So for a given ques- • Explanation of evaluation metrics used with
tion and a context, it classifies the indices in links to code: It is done in knowl-
in which the answer starts and ends. As a edge probing/probing/metrics.py. But the
lossfunctionitusescrossentropy. Themodel one that we use are Precision @ k where we
was trained on a single GPU. We used the just check if the model predicts the correct
huggingface default training script and stan- tokenatindex<=k(P@k)
dard parameters: 2 epochs, learning rate 3e-
6.3 Hyperparameterseach:
5,batchsize12.
Notapplicable.
• QA-SQUAD-2: SingleGPU,alsousinghug-
6.4 Datasets:
gingfacetrainingscriptwithstandardparam-
eters. Learning rate was 3e-5, batch size 12, • Wikitext-2: Used for fine-tuning the MLM
bestmodelafter2epochs. head. Subset of the Englisch Wikipedia for
long term dependency language modeling.
• MLM-SQUAD: Fine tuned on text from 2,088,628 tokens for training, 217.646
SQUAD using the masked language model- for validation, 245.569 for testing. Vo-
ing objective as per (Devlin et al., 2019). cab size: 33,278 out of vocab: 2.6% of
15% of the tokens masked at random. tokens. It can be downloaded from here:
Trained for 4 epochs with LR 5e-5. Single https://www.salesforce.com/products/einstein/ai-
GPU. research/the-wikitext-dependency-language-
modeling-dataset/
• RANK-MSMARCO: Trained as described in
• LAMA probe data: Can be
(Nogueira and Cho, 2019). MSMARCO,
downloaded from their github:
100k iterations with batch size 128 (on a
https://github.com/facebookresearch/LAMA
TPUv3-8).
. Only used for testing. Consists of:
• MLM-MSMARCO: 15% of the tokens Google-RE: 5528 instances over 3 relations.
masked at random. 3 epochs, batch size 8, T-REx: 34017 instances over 41 relations.
LR5e-5. Singlegpu. ConceptNet: 12514 instances. This is not
groupedintorelations. Squad: 305instances.
6.2 Experimentalresults: Context in-sensitive questions rewritten to
cloze-statements. Nospecificrelationeither.
• Computing infrastructure used: Everything
can be run in Colab notebook with 12gb of • SQuAD 1.1: Can be downloaded from
RAM and the standard GPU. The experi- here: https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-
ments, however, havebeenrunonacomput- explorer/ . 100,000+ question answer pairs
ing cluster with 6 nodes. Every node had 4 based on wikipedia articles. Produced by
gtx1080tiand128gbRAM.Thusbeingable crowdworkers.
toparallizetheprobingofdifferentlayers.
• SQuAD 2: Can be downloaded from here:
4https://github.com/huggingface/transformers https://rajpurkar.github.io/SQuAD-explorer/
. Combines the 100,000+ question answer 6.5 KnowledgecapturedinBERT
pairswith50,000unanswerablequestions.
6.5.1 IntermediateLayersMatter
• MSMARCO:Canbedownlaodedfromhere: AdditionalprecisionsforFigure4canbefoundin
https://microsoft.github.io/msmarco/ . For Figure9.
ranking: Dataset for passage reranking was
6.5.2 RelationalKnowledgeEvolution
used. Given 1,000 passages, re-rank by rele-
AdditionalprecisionsforFigure2canbefoundin
vance. Dataset contains 8,8m passages. For
Figure10.
MLM training: Dataset for QA was used.
It consists of over 1m queries and the 8,8m 6.5.3 Effectofdatasetsize
passages. Each query has 10 candidate pas-
Figure11and12showtheP@10andP@100plots
sages. For MLM, we appended the queries
forFigure5. Respectively,Figure13and14show
with all candidate passages before feeding
thesamefor6.
intoBERT.
6.6 Effectoffinetuningobjective
ForcomparingMLMandQAonSQuAD(7),Fig-
ure 15 and 16 show more precisions. Also, for
comparing fine tune objectives on MSMARCO
(Figure 8), Figure 17 and 18 show P@10 and
P@100.
(a)P@1 (b)P@10 (c)P@100
Figure 9: Mean performance in different precisions on T-REx sets for BERT, QA-SQUAD-2, RANK-
MSMARCO,NER-CONLL.
(a)P@1 (b)P@10 (c)P@100
Figure10: MeanperformanceofBERTacrossalllayersandprobesets.
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure11: Effectofdatasetsize. ShowingP@10
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure12: Effectofdatasetsize. ShowingP@100
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure13: Effectofdatasetsize. ShowingP@10fortheQAobjective.
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure14: Effectofdatasetsize. ShowingP@100fortheQAobjective.
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure15: EffectofFine-TuningObjectiveonfixedsizedata: SQUAD.ShowingP@10.
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure16: EffectofFine-TuningObjectiveonfixedsizedata: SQUAD.ShowingP@100.
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure17: EffectofFine-TuningObjectiveonfixedsizedata: MSMarco. ShowingP@10.
(a)ConceptNet (b)T-REx (c)Squad (d)Google-RE
Figure18: EffectofFine-TuningObjectiveonfixedsizedata: MSMarco. ShowingP@100.
Model Google-RE T-REx ConceptNet Squad
P@1 P@1 P@1 P@1 P@1 P@1 P@1 P@1
BERT 10 15 29 34 15 21 13 20
QA-SQUAD-1 3 9 6 15 7 15 5 15
QA-SQUAD-2 3 9 10 19 8 16 6 13
MLM-SQUAD 4 10 15 23 9 16 6 16
RANK-MSMARCO 6 11 23 29 12 19 10 20
MLM-MSMARCO 3 7 14 21 11 17 7 12
Table3: Meanknowledgecontainedinthelastlayer(P@1)vsknowledgecontainedinalllayers(P@1)foreachprobe.