Cost-Sensitive BERT for Generalisable
Sentence Classification with Imbalanced Data
HarishTayyarMadabushi1 and ElenaKochkina2,3 and MichaelCastelle2,3
1 UniversityofBirmingham,UK
H.TayyarMadabushi.1@bham.ac.uk
2UniversityofWarwick,UK
(E.Kochkina,M.Castelle.1)@warwick.ac.uk
3AlanTuringInstitute,UK
Abstract events discussed on social media, respectively) is
significantlylowerthanthenumberofelementsin
The automatic identification of propaganda
theotherclasses.
has gained significance in recent years due to
TherecentlyintroducedBERTlanguagemodel
technological and social changes in the way
for transfer learning (Devlin et al., 2018) uses a
news is generated and consumed. That this
deepbidirectionaltransformerarchitecturetopro-
taskcanbeaddressedeffectivelyusingBERT,
apowerfulnewarchitecturewhichcanbefine- duce pre-trained context-dependent embeddings.
tuned for text classification tasks, is not sur- IthasproventobepowerfulinsolvingmanyNLP
prising. However, propaganda detection, like tasksand,aswefind,alsoappearstohandleimbal-
othertasksthatdealwithnewsdocumentsand anced classification well, thus removing the need
other forms of decontextualized social com-
to use standard methods of data augmentation to
munication (e.g. sentiment analysis), inher-
mitigatethisproblem(seeSection2.2.2forrelated
ently deals with data whose categories are si-
workandSection4.1foranalysis).
multaneously imbalanced and dissimilar. We
show that BERT, while capable of handling BERT is credited with the ability to adapt to
imbalanced classes with no additional data many tasks and data with very little training (De-
augmentation, does not generalise well when vlin et al., 2018). However, we show that BERT
the training and test data are sufficiently dis- fails to perform well when the training and test
similar(asisoftenthecasewithnewssources,
dataaresignificantlydissimilar,asisthecasewith
whosetopicsevolveovertime). Weshowhow
several tasks that deal with social and news data.
toaddressthisproblembyprovidingastatisti-
In these cases, the training data is necessarily a
calmeasureofsimilaritybetweendatasetsand
subset of past data, while the model is likely to
amethodofincorporatingcost-weightinginto
BERT when the training and test sets are dis- be used on future data which deals with different
similar. We test these methods on the Propa- topics. Thisworkaddressesthisproblembyincor-
ganda Techniques Corpus (PTC) and achieve poratingcost-sensitivity(Section4.2)intoBERT.
thesecondhighestscoreonsentence-levelpro-
We test these methods by participating in the
pagandaclassification.
Shared Task on Fine-Grained Propaganda Detec-
tion for the 2nd Workshop on NLP for Internet
1 Introduction
Freedom,forwhichweachievethesecondrankon
The challenges of imbalanced classification—in sentence-level classification of propaganda, con-
which the proportion of elements in each class firming the importance of cost-sensitivity when
foraclassificationtasksignificantlydiffer—andof thetrainingandtestsetsaredissimilar.
theabilitytogeneraliseondissimilardatahavere-
1.1 DetectingPropaganda
mained important problems in Natural Language
Processing (NLP) and Machine Learning in gen- The term ‘propaganda’ derives from propagare
eral. PopularNLPtasksincludingsentimentanal- in post-classical Latin, as in “propagation of the
ysis, propaganda detection, and event extraction faith”(AuerbachandCastronovo,2014),andthus
fromsocialmediaareallexamplesofimbalanced has from the beginning been associated with an
classification problems. In each case the num- intentional and potentially multicast communica-
ber of elements in one of the classes (e.g. nega- tion; only later did it become a pejorative term.
tive sentiment, propagandistic content, or specific It was pragmatically defined in the World War II
era as “the expression of an opinion or an action and Google Colaboratory1, so that other re-
by individuals or groups deliberately designed to searcherscanbenefitfromthiswork.
influencetheopinionsortheactionsofotherindi-
vidualsorgroupswithreferencetopredetermined 2 Relatedwork
ends”(InstituteforPropagandaAnalysis,1937).
2.1 Propagandadetection
ForthephilosopherandsociologistJacquesEl-
lul, however, in a society with mass communica- Most of the existing works on propaganda detec-
tion, propaganda is inevitable and thus it is nec- tion focus on identifying propaganda at the news
essary to become more aware of it (Ellul, 1973); article level, or even at the news outlet level with
but whether or not to classify a given strip of text the assumption that each of the articles of the
as propaganda depends not just on its content but suspected propagandistic outlet are propaganda
on its use on the part of both addressers and ad- (Rashkinetal.,2017;Barro´n-Ceden˜oetal.,2019).
dressees(AuerbachandCastronovo,2014,6),and Here we study two tasks that are more
this fact makes the automated detection of propa- fine-grained, specifically propaganda detection
gandaintrinsicallychallenging. at the sentence and phrase (fragment) levels
Despite this difficulty, interest in automatically (Da San Martino et al., 2019). This fine-grained
detecting misinformation and/or propaganda has setup aims to train models that identify linguistic
gained significance due to the exponential growth propaganda techniques rather than distinguishing
in online sources of information combined with betweenthearticlesourcestyles.
thespeedwithwhichinformationissharedtoday. Da San Martino et al. (2019) were the first
The sheer volume of social interactions makes to propose this problem setup and release it
it impossible to manually check the veracity of as a shared task.2 Along with the released
all information being shared. Automation thus dataset, Da San Martino et al. (2019) proposed
remains a potentially viable method of ensuring amulti-granularityneuralnetwork,whichusesthe
that we continue to enjoy the benefits of a con- deepbidirectionaltransformerarchitectureknown
nectedworldwithoutthespreadofmisinformation as BERT, which features pre-trained context-
througheitherignoranceormaliciousintent. dependentembeddings(Devlinetal.,2018). Their
In the task introduced by Da San Martino et al. system takes a joint learning approach to the
(2019), we are provided with articles tagged as sentence- and phrase-level tasks, concatenating
propagandaatthesentenceandfragment(orspan) the output representation of the less granular
level and are tasked with making predictions on a (sentence-level) task with the more fine-grained
development set followed by a final held-out test taskusinglearnedweights.
set. We note this gives us access to the articles in In this work we also take the BERT model as
thedevelopmentandtestsetsbutnottheirlabels. the basis of our approach and focus on the class
Weparticipatedinthistaskundertheteamname imbalanceaswellasthelackofsimilaritybetween
ProperGander and were placed 2nd on the sen- trainingandtestdatainherenttothetask.
tence level classification task where we make use
2.2 Classimbalance
of our methods of incorporating cost-sensitivity
into BERT. We also participated in the fragment AcommonissueformanyNaturalLanguagePro-
leveltaskandwereplaced7th. Thesignificantcon- cessing (NLP) classification tasks is class imbal-
tributionsofthisworkare: ance, the situation where one of the class cate-
gories comprises a significantly larger proportion
• We show that common (‘easy’) methods of
ofthedatasetthantheotherclasses. Itisespecially
data augmentation for dealing with class im-
prominent in real-world datasets and complicates
balance do not improve base BERT perfor-
classificationwhentheidentificationoftheminor-
mance.
ityclassisofspecificimportance.
• We provide a statistical method of establish- Models trained on the basis of minimising er-
ingthesimilarityofdatasets. rors for imbalanced datasets tend to more fre-
• Weincorporatecost-sensitivityintoBERTto 1http://www.harishmadabushi.com/
enablemodelstoadapttodissimilardatasets. research/propaganda-detection/
2https://propaganda.qcri.org/
• We release all our program code on GitHub nlp4if-shared-task/
quently predict the majority class; achieving high form data augmentation using synonym replace-
accuracy in such cases can be misleading. Be- ment, i.e. replacing random words in sentences
causeofthis,themacro-averagedF-score,chosen with their synonyms or nearest-neighbor embed-
forthiscompetition,isamoresuitablemetricasit dings,andshowitseffectivenessonmultipletasks
weightstheperformanceoneachclassequally. and datasets. Wei et al. (2019) provide a great
Asclassimbalanceisawidespreadissue,multi- overviewof‘easy’dataaugmentation(EDA)tech-
pletechniqueshavebeendevelopedthathelpalle- niques for NLP, including synonym replacement
viate it (Buda et al., 2018; Haixiang et al., 2017), as described above, and random deletion, i.e. re-
by either adjusting the model (e.g. changing the moving words in the sentence at random with
performance metric) or changing the data (e.g. pre-defined probability. They show the effective-
oversamplingtheminorityclassorundersampling ness of EDA across five text classification tasks.
themajorityclass). However, they mention that EDA may not lead to
substantial improvements when using pre-trained
2.2.1 Cost-sensitivelearning
models. In this work we test this claim by com-
Cost-sensitiveclassificationcanbeusedwhenthe paring performance gains of using cost-sensitive
“cost”ofmislabellingoneclassishigherthanthat learning versus two data augmentation methods,
of mislabelling other classes (Elkan, 2001; Kukar synonym replacement and random deletion, with
et al., 1998). For example, the real cost to a bank apre-trainedBERTmodel.
of miscategorising a large fraudulent transaction More complex augmentation methods include
as authentic is potentially higher than miscate- back-translation (Sennrich et al., 2015), transla-
gorising (perhaps only temporarily) a valid trans- tionaldataaugmentation(Fadaeeetal.,2017),and
actionasfraudulent. Cost-sensitivelearningtack- noising (Xie et al., 2017), but these are out of the
les the issue of class imbalance by changing the scopeofthisstudy.
cost function of the model such that misclassi-
fication of training examples from the minority 3 Dataset
class carries more weight and is thus more ‘ex-
pensive’. This is achieved by simply multiplying ThePropagandaTechniquesCorpus(PTC)dataset
the loss of each example by a certain factor. This for the 2019 Shared Task on Fine-Grained Pro-
cost-sensitive learning technique takes misclassi- paganda consists of a training set of 350 news
fication costs into account during model training, articles, consisting of just over 16,965 total sen-
anddoesnotmodifytheimbalanceddatadistribu- tences, in which specifically propagandistic frag-
tiondirectly. mentshavebeenmanuallyspottedandlabelledby
experts. This is accompanied by a development
2.2.2 Dataaugmentation set(ordevset)of61articleswith2,235totalsen-
Common methods that tackle the problem of tences,whoselabelsaremaintainedbytheshared
class imbalance by modifying the data to cre- task organisers; and two months after the release
atebalanceddatasetsareundersamplingandover- ofthisdata,theorganisersreleasedatestsetof86
sampling. Undersampling randomly removes in- articles and 3,526 total sentences. In the training
stancesfromthemajorityclassandisonlysuitable set,4,720(∼ 28%)ofthesentenceshavebeenas-
for problems with an abundance of data. Over- sessedascontainingpropaganda,with12,245sen-
sampling means creating more minority class in- tences (∼ 72%) as non-propaganda, demonstrat-
stances to match the size of the majority class. ingaclearclassimbalance.
Oversamplingmethodsrangefromsimplerandom Inthebinarysentence-levelclassification(SLC)
oversampling, i.e. repeating the training proce- task, a model is trained to detect whether each
dure on instances from the minority class, cho- andeverysentenceiseither’propaganda’or’non-
sen at random, to the more complex, which in- propaganda’; in the more challenging field-level
volves constructing synthetic minority-class sam- classification (FLC) task, a model is trained to
ples. Random oversampling is similar to cost- detect one of 18 possible propaganda technique
sensitive learning as repeating the sample several types in spans of characters within sentences.
timesmakesthecostofitsmis-classificationgrow ThesepropagandatypesarelistedinDaSanMar-
proportionally. Kolomiyets et al. (2011), Zhang tino et al. (2019) and range from those which
et al. (2015), and Wang and Yang (2015) per- might be recognisable at the lexical level (e.g.
NAME CALLING,REPETITION),andthosewhich
Set1 Set2
p-value p-value % Similar
(min) (max) Tests
would likely need to incorporate semantic under-
50% 50%
2.38E-01 9.11E-01 100
standing(RED HERRING, STRAW MAN).3 Train Train
50%Dev 50%Dev 5.55E-01 9.96E-01 100
For several example sentences from a sample 50%Test 50%Test 6.21E-01 8.88E-01 100
document annotated with fragment-level classi- 25%Dev 75%Dev 1.46E-01 5.72E-01 100
25%Test 75%Test 3.70E-02 7.55E-01 90
fications (FLC) (Figure 1). The corresponding
25% 75%
9.08E-02 9.66E-01 100
sentence-level classification (SLC) labels would Train Train
Train Dev 2.05E-09 4.33E-05 0
indicate that sentences 3, 4, and 7 are ’propa- Train Test 8.37E-23 1.18E-14 0
ganda’ while the the other sentences are ‘non- Dev Test 2.72E-04 2.11E-02 0
propaganda’.
Table 1: p-values representing the similarity between
(partsof)thetrain,testanddevelopmentsets.
3.1 DataDistribution
Oneofthemostinterestingaspectsofthedatapro- clelevel),itisconsistentwiththegranularityused
vided for this task is the notable difference be- forpropagandadetection,whichisalsoatthesen-
tween the training and the development/test sets. tencelevel. Wealsoperformmeasurementsofself
We emphasise that this difference is realistic and similarityaftersplittingthedataatthearticlelevel
reflectiveofrealworldnewsdata, inwhichmajor andfindthattheconclusionsofsimilaritybetween
stories are often accompanied by the introduction the sets hold with a p-value threshold of 0.001,
of new terms, names, and even phrases. This is where p-values for similarity between the train-
because the training data is a subset of past data inganddev/testsetsareordersofmagnitudelower
whilethemodelistobeusedonfuturedatawhich comparedtoself-similarity. Sinceweuserandom
dealswithdifferentnewsworthytopics. samplingwerunthistest10timesandpresentthe
We demonstrate this difference statistically by boththemaximumandminimump-values. Wein-
using a method for finding the similarity of cor- cludethesimilaritybetween25%ofadatasetand
pora suggested by Kilgarriff (2001). We use the remaining 75% of that set because that is the
the Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Wilcoxon, 1945) train/test ratio we use in our experiments, further
whichcomparesthefrequencycountsofrandomly describedinourmethodology(Section4).
sampledelementsfromdifferentdatasetstodeter-
Thisanalysisshowsthatwhileallsplitsofeach
mine if those datasets have a statistically similar
of the datasets are statistically similar, the train-
distributionofelements.
ing set (and the split of the training set that we
We implement this as follows. For each of the
use for experimentation) are significantly differ-
training, development and test sets, we extract all
entfromthedevelopmentandtestsets. Whileour
words (retaining the repeats) while ignoring a set
analysis does show that the development and the
of stopwords (identified through the Python Nat-
test sets are dissimilar, we note (based on the p-
ural Language Toolkit). We then extract 10,000
values) that they are significantly more similar to
samples (with replacements) for various pairs of
eachotherthantheyaretothetrainingset.
thesedatasets(training,development,andtestsets
along with splits of each of these datasets). Fi- 4 Methodology
nally, we use comparative word frequencies from
the two sets to calculate the p-value using the Wewereprovidedwithtwotasks: (1)propaganda
Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Table 1 provides the fragment-level identification (FLC) and (2) pro-
minimum and maximum p-values and their inter- pagandistic sentence-level identification (SLC).
pretations for ten such runs of each pair reported. Whilewedevelopsystemsforbothtasks,ourmain
Withp-valuelessthan0.05,weshowthatthetrain, focus is toward the latter. Given the differences
developmentandtestsetsareself-similarandalso between the training, development, and test sets,
significantly different from each other. In mea- wefocusonmethodsforgeneralisingourmodels.
suring self-similarity, we split each dataset after We note that propaganda identification is, in gen-
shuffling all sentences. While this comparison is eral, an imbalanced binary classification problem
madeatthesentencelevel(asopposedtothearti- asmostsentencesarenotpropagandistic.
Duetothenon-deterministicnatureoffastGPU
3https://propaganda.qcri.org/
computations, we run each of our models three
annotations/includesaflowchartinstructingannotators
todiscoverandisolatethese18propagandacategories. times and report the average of these three runs
TheSenateJudiciaryCommitteevoted11-10alongpartylinestoadvancethenominationofJudge
Sentence1:
BrettKavanaughoutofcommitteetotheSenatefloorforavote.
Ofcourse,RINOSenatorJeffFlake(R-AZ)wantedtosidewithSenateDemocratsinpushingfora
Sentence2:
FBIinvestigationintounsubstantiatedallegationsagainstKavanaugh.
OutgoingFlake,and<LOADED LANGUAGE>goodriddance</LOADED LANGUAGE>,saidthat
Sentence3: hesidedwithhiscolleaguesinhavinga”limitedtimeandscope”investigationbytheFBIintothe
allegationsagainstKavanaugh.
“<FLAG-WAVING> Thiscountryisbeingrippedaparthere,andwe’vegottomakesurewedo
Sentence4: duediligence</FLAG-WAVING>,”Flakesaid.
Sentence5: Headdedthathewouldbemore”comfortable”withanFBIinvestigation.
Sentence6: Comfort?
<WHATABOUTISM>WhataboutJudgeKavanaugh’scomfortinbeingputthroughtheringer
Sentence7: withoutashredofevidence,SenatorFlake</WHATABOUTISM>?
Figure 1: Excerpt of an example (truncated) news document with three separate field-level classification (FLC)
tags,forLOADEDLANGUAGE,FLAG-WAVING,ANDWHATABOUTISM.
throughtherestofthissection. Whenpickingthe when,aftershufflingthetrainingdata,wetrainthe
modeltouseforourfinalsubmission,wepickthe modelon75%ofthetrainingdataandtestitonthe
modelthatperformsbestonthedevelopmentset. remaining25%ofthetrainingdataandthedevel-
When testing our models, we split the labelled opmentdata.
training data into two non-overlapping parts: the
Augmentation f1-scoreon f1-scoreon
first one, consisting of 75% of the training data is
Technique 25%ofTrain Dev
used to train models, whereas the other is used to
None 0.7954 0.5803
test the effectiveness of the models. All models Synonym
0.7889 0.5833
are trained and tested on the same split to ensure Insertion
Dropping
comparability. Similarly, to ensure that our mod- 0.7791 0.5445
Words
elsremaincomparable,wecontinuetotrainonthe OverSampling 0.7843 0.6276
same75%ofthetrainingsetevenwhentestingon
Table 2: F1 scores on an unseen (not used for train-
thedevelopmentset.
ing)partofthetrainingsetandthedevelopmentseton
Oncethebestmodelisfoundusingthesemeth-
BERTusingdifferentaugmentationtechniques.
ods,wetrainthatmodelonallofthetrainingdata
availablebeforethensubmittingtheresultsonthe We observe that BERT without augmentation
development set to the leaderboard. These results consistently outperforms BERT with augmenta-
are detailed in the section describing our results tion in the experiments when the model is trained
(Section5). on 75% of the training data and evaluated on the
rest, i.e trained and evaluated on similar data,
4.1 ClassImbalanceinSentenceLevel
coming from the same distribution. This is con-
Classification
sistent withobservations by Wei etal. (2019) that
The sentence level classification task is an imbal- contextualwordembeddingsdonotgainfromdata
anced binary classification problem that we ad- augmentation. Thefactthatweshufflethetraining
dress using BERT (Devlin et al., 2018). We use data prior to splitting it into training and testing
BERT , uncased, which consists of 12 self- subsets could imply that the model is learning to
BASE
attentionlayers,andreturnsa768-dimensionvec- associate topic words, such as ‘Mueller’, as pro-
tor that representation a sentence. So as to make paganda. However,whenweperformmodeleval-
use of BERT for sentence classification, we in- uationusingthedevelopmentset,whichisdissim-
clude a fully connected layer on top of the BERT ilar to the training, we observe that synonym in-
self-attentionlayers, whichclassifiesthesentence sertion and word dropping techniques also do not
embeddingprovidedbyBERTintothetwoclasses bring performance gains, while random oversam-
ofinterest(propagandaornon-propaganda). pling increases performance over base BERT by
We attempt to exploit various data augmenta- 4%. Synonyminsertionprovidesresultsverysim-
tiontechniquestoaddresstheproblemofclassim- ilar to base BERT, while random deletion harms
balance. Table 2 shows the results of our experi- model performance producing lower scores. We
ments for different data augmentation techniques believethatthiscouldbeattributedtothefactthat
synonyminsertionandrandomworddroppingin- 4.2 Cost-sensitiveClassification
volve the introduction of noise to the data, while
As discussed in Section 2.2.1, cost-sensitive clas-
oversampling does not. As we are working with
sification can be performed by weighting the cost
naturallanguagedata,thistypeofnoisecaninfact
function. Weincreasetheweightofincorrectlyla-
change the meaning of the sentence. Oversam-
belling a propagandistic sentence by altering the
plingontheotherhandpurelyincreasestheimpor-
costfunctionofthetrainingofthefinalfullycon-
tanceoftheminorityclassbyrepeatingtrainingon
nected layer of our model previously described in
theunchangedinstances.
Section 4.1. We make these changes through the
So as to better understand the aspects of over-
use of PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) which cal-
sampling that contribute to these gains, we per-
culates the cross-entropy loss for a single predic-
form a class-wise performance analysis of BERT tion x, an array where the jth element represents
with/without oversampling. The results of these
themodelspredictionforclassj,labelledwiththe
experiments (Table 3) show that oversampling in-
classclassasgivenbyEquation1.
creasestheoverallrecallwhilemaintainingpreci-
sion. This is achieved by significantly improving
(cid:32) (cid:33)
therecalloftheminorityclass(propaganda)atthe exp(x[class])
loss(x,class) = −log
costoftherecallofthemajorityclass. (cid:80) exp(x[j])
j
  (1)
OS NoOS
(cid:88)
precision 0.7967 0.7933 = −x[class]+log exp(x[j])
recall 0.7767 0.8000 j
f1-score 0.7843 0.7954
The cross-entropy loss given in Equation 1 is
Non-Propaganda
precision
0.8733 0.8467 modifiedtoaccommodateanarrayweight,theith
Non-Propagandarecall 0.8100 0.8900 element of which represents the weight of the ith
Non-PropagandaF1 0.8433 0.8667 class,asdescribedinEquation2.
Propagandaprecision 0.5800 0.6600
Propagandarecall 0.6933 0.5533
PropagandaF1 0.6300 0.6033 loss(x,class) = weight[class]Θ
 
Table3:Class-wiseprecisionandrecallwithandwith- (cid:88)
where,Θ = −x[class]+log exp(x[j])
outoversampling(OS)achievedonunseenpartofthe
j
trainingset.
(2)
Sofarwehavebeenabletoestablishthata)the Intuitively, we increase the cost of getting the
training and test sets are dissimilar, thus requir- classification of an “important” class wrong and
ing us to generalise our model, b) oversampling corresponding decrees the cost of getting a less
provides a method of generalisation, and c) over- important class wrong. In our case, we increase
samplingdoesthiswhilemaintainingrecallonthe thecostofmislabellingtheminorityclasswhichis
minority(andthusmoreinteresting)class. “propaganda”(asopposedto“non-propaganda”).
Given this we explore alternative methods of Weexpecttheeffectofthistobesimilartothat
increasing minority class recall without a signif- of oversampling, in that it is likely to enable us
icant drop in precision. One such method is to increase the recall of the minority class thus
cost-sensitive classification, which differs from resulting in the decrease in recall of the overall
random oversampling in that it provides a model while maintaining high precision. We re-
morecontinuous-valuedandconsistentmethodof iterate that this specific change to a model results
weighting samples of imbalanced training data; in increasing the model’s ability to better identify
forexample,randomoversamplingwillinevitably elementsbelongingtotheminorityclassindissim-
emphasise some training instances at the expense ilardatasetswhenusingBERT.
of others. We detail our methods of using cost- We explore the validity of this by perform-
sensitiveclassificationinthenextsection. Further ingseveralexperimentswithdifferentweightsas-
experiments with oversampling might have pro- signed to the minority class. We note that in our
videdinsightsintotherelationshipsbetweenthese experiments use significantly higher weights than
methods,whichweleaveforfutureexploration. theweightsproportionaltoclassfrequenciesinthe
dings does not improve model performance. We
describetheseresultsinSection5.
4.3 Fragment-levelclassification(FLC)
In addition to participating in the Sentence Level
ClassificationtaskwealsoparticipateintheFrag-
ment Level Classification task. We note that ex-
tracting fragments that are propagandistic is sim-
ilar to the task of Named Entity Recognition, in
thattheyarebothspanextractiontasks,andsouse
a BERT based model designed for this task - We
build on the work by Emelyanov and Artemova
(2019) which makes use of Continuous Random
FieldstackedontopofanLSTMtopredictspans.
Figure 2: The impact of modifying the minority class This architecture is standard amongst state of the
weightsontheperformanceonsimilar(subsetoftrain- artmodelsthatperformspanidentification.
ing set) and dissimilar (development) datasets. The Whilethesamespanoftextcannothavemulti-
methodofincreasingminorityclassweightsisableto ple named entity labels, it can have different pro-
pushthemodeltowardsgeneralisationwhilemaintain-
paganda labels. We get around this problem by
ingprecision.
picking one of the labels at random. Addition-
ally, so as to speed up training, we only train our
training data, that are common in literature (Ling
modelonthosesentencesthatcontainsomepropa-
and Sheng, 2011). Rather than directly using the
gandisticfragment. Inhindsight,wenotethatboth
classproportionsofthetrainingset, weshowthat
thesedecisionswerenotidealanddiscusswhatwe
tuning weights based on performance on the de-
mighthaveotherwisedoneinSection7.
velopment set is more beneficial. Figure 2 shows
the results of these experiments wherein we are
5 Results
abletomaintaintheprecisiononthesubsetofthe
training set used for testing while reducing its re- In this section, we show our rankings on the
callandthusgeneralisingthemodel. Thefactthat leaderboardonthetestset. Unlikethepreviousex-
the model is generalising on a dissimilar dataset ploratorysections,inwhichwetrainedourmodel
is confirmed by the increase in the development on part of the training set, we train models de-
set F1 score. We note that the gains are not infi- scribedinthissectiononthecompletetrainingset.
niteandthatabalancemustbestruckbasedonthe
5.1 ResultsontheSLCtask
amount of generalisation and the corresponding
loss in accuracy. The exact weight to use for the Our best performing model, selected on the ba-
best transfer of classification accuracy is related sis of a systematic analysis of the relationship
tothedissimilarityofthatotherdatasetandhence between cost weights and recall, places us sec-
istobeobtainedexperimentallythroughhyperpa- ondamongstthe25teamsthatsubmittedtheirre-
rameter search. Our experiments showed that a sults on this task. We present our score on the
valueof4isbestsuitedforthistask. test set alongside those of comparable teams in
We do not include the complete results of our Table 4. We note that the task description pa-
experiments here due to space constraints but in- per (Da San Martino et al., 2019) describes a
cludethemalongwithchartsandprogramcodeon method of achieving an F1 score of 60.98% on
ourprojectwebsite. Basedonthisexplorationwe a similar task although this reported score is not
findthatthebestweightsforthisparticulardataset directly comparable to the results on this task be-
are 1 for non-propaganda and 4 for propaganda causeofthedifferencesintestingsets.
and we use this to train the final model used to
5.2 ResultsontheFLCtask
submit results to the leaderboard. We also found
that adding Part of Speech tags and Named En- We train the model described in Section 4.3 on
tityinformationtoBERTembeddingsbyconcate- the complete training set before submitting to the
nating these one-hot vectors to the BERT embed- leaderboard. Our best performing model was
Rank Team F1 Precision Recall nomenon and takes place as an act of communi-
1 ltuorp 0.632375 0.602885 0.664899 cation (O’Shaughnessy, 2005, 13-14), and so it
Proper-
2 0.625651 0.564957 0.700954 is more than a simple information-theoretic mes-
Gander
3 YMJA 0.624934 0.625265 0.624602 sage of zeros and ones—it also incorporates an
... addresser and addressee(s), each in phatic con-
20 Baseline 0.434701 0.388010 0.494168 tact (typically via broadcast media), ideally with
a shared denotational code and contextual sur-
Table 4: Our results on the SLC task (2nd, in bold)
round(s)(Jakobson,1960).
alongside comparable results from the competition
leaderboard. As such, a dataset of decontextualised docu-
ments with labelled sentences, devoid of autho-
placed 7th amongst the 13 teams that submitted rial or publisher metadata, has taken us at some
results for this task. We present our score on removefromevenasimpleeverydaydefinitionof
the test set alongside those of comparable teams propaganda. Our models for this shared task can-
in Table 5. We note that the task description not easily incorporate information about the ad-
paper (Da San Martino et al., 2019) describes a dresser or addressee; are left to assume a shared
method of achieving an F1 score of 22.58% on a denotationalcodebetweenauthorandreader(one
similartaskalthough,thisreportedscoreisnotdi- perhapssimulatedwiththeuseofpre-trainedword
rectlycomparabletotheresultsonthistask. embeddings); and they are unaware of when or
wheretheact(s)ofpropagandisticcommunication
Rank Team F1 Precision Recall took place. This slipperiness is illustrated in our
1 newspeak 0.248849 0.286299 0.220063 example document (Fig. 1): note that while Sen-
2 Anti- 0.226745 0.288213 0.186887 tences 3 and 7, labelled as propaganda, reflect a
ganda
propagandistic attitude on the part of the journal-
...
6 aschern 0.109060 0.071528 0.229464 ist and/or publisher, Sentence 4—also labelled as
Proper- propagandainthetrainingdata—insteadreflectsa
7 0.098969 0.065167 0.205634
Gander
“flag-waving” propagandistic attitude on the part
...
of U.S. congressman Jeff Flake, via the conven-
11 Baseline 0.000015 0.011628 0.000008
tions of reported speech (Volosˇinov, 1973, 115-
Table 5: Our results on the FLC task (7th, in bold) 130). While reported speech often is signaled by
alongside those of better performing teams from the specific morphosyntactic patterns (e.g. the use
competitionleaderboard. of double-quotes and “Flake said”) (Spronck and
Nikitina,2019),wearguethathumanreadersrou-
One of the major setbacks to our method for
tinely distinguish propagandistic reportage from
identifying sentence fragments was the loss of
thepropagandasticspeechactsofitssubjects,and
training data as a result of randomly picking one
toconflatethesecategoriesinapropagandadetec-
labelwhenthesamefragmenthadmultiplelabels.
tion corpus may contribute to the occurrence of
This could have been avoided by training differ-
falsepositives/negatives.
ent models for each label and simply concatenat-
ing the results. Additionally, training on all sen-
tences, including those that did not contain any 7 ConclusionsandFutureWork
fragments labelled as propagandistic would have
likely improved our model performance. We in-
In this work we have presented a method of in-
tend to perform these experiments as part of our
corporatingcost-sensitivityintoBERTtoallowfor
ongoingresearch.
better generalisation and additionally, we provide
asimplemeasureofcorpussimilaritytodetermine
6 IssuesofDecontextualizationin
whenthismethodislikelytobeuseful. Weintend
AutomatedPropagandaDetection
to extend our analysis of the ability to generalise
It is worth reflecting on the nature of the shared models to less similar data by experimenting on
task dataset (PTC corpus) and its structural cor- other datasets and models. We hope that the re-
respondence (or lack thereof) to some of the leaseofprogramcodeanddocumentationwillal-
definitions of propaganda mentioned in the in- lowtheresearchcommunitytohelpinthisexper-
troduction. First, propaganda is a social phe- imentationwhileexploitingthesemethods.
Acknowledgements Marzieh Fadaee, Arianna Bisazza, and Christof
Monz. 2017. Data augmentation for low-
We would like to thank Dr Leandro Minku from resourceneuralmachinetranslation. arXivpreprint
arXiv:1705.00440.
theUniversityofBirminghamforhisinsightsinto
and help with the statistical analysis presented in GuoHaixiang,LiYijing,JenniferShang,GuMingyun,
thispaper. Huang Yuanyue, and Gong Bing. 2017. Learn-
ingfromclass-imbalanceddata: Reviewofmethods
This work was also partially supported by The
andapplications. ExpertSystemswithApplications,
Alan Turing Institute under the EPSRC grant
73:220–239.
EP/N510129/1. WorkbyElenaKochkinawaspar-
tially supported by the Leverhulme Trust through InstituteforPropagandaAnalysis.1937. Howtodetect
propaganda. PropagandaAnalysis,1(2):5–8.
theBridgesProgrammeandWarwickCDTforUr-
ban Science & Progress under the EPSRC Grant Roman Jakobson. 1960. Closing Statement: Linguis-
NumberEP/L016400/1. tics and Poetics. In Thomas A. Sebeok, editor,
StyleinLanguage,pages350–377.MITPress,Cam-
bridge,MA.
References Adam Kilgarriff. 2001. Comparing corpora. Interna-
tionalJournalofCorpusLinguistics,6(1):97–133.
Jonathan Auerbach and Russ Castronovo, editors.
2014. The Oxford Handbook of Propaganda Stud- Oleksandr Kolomiyets, Steven Bethard, and Marie-
ies. Oxford Handbooks. Oxford University Press, Francine Moens. 2011. Model-portability experi-
Oxford,NewYork. mentsfortextualtemporalanalysis. InProceedings
of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
ComputationalLinguistics:HumanLanguageTech-
AlbertoBarro´n-Ceden˜o,GiovanniDaSanMartino,Is-
raa Jaradat, and Preslav Nakov. 2019. Proppy: A nologies: short papers-Volume 2, pages 271–276.
system to unmask propaganda in online news. In AssociationforComputationalLinguistics.
ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIn-
Matjaz Kukar, Igor Kononenko, et al. 1998. Cost-
telligence,volume33,pages9847–9848.
sensitive learning with neural networks. In ECAI,
pages445–449.
Mateusz Buda, Atsuto Maki, and Maciej A
Mazurowski. 2018. A systematic study of the CXLingandVSSheng.2011. Cost-sensitivelearning
class imbalance problem in convolutional neural and the class imbalance problem. Encyclopedia of
networks. NeuralNetworks,106:249–259. MachineLearning: Springer,24.
Giovanni Da San Martino, Seunghak Yu, Alberto Nicholas Jackson O’Shaughnessy. 2005. Politics and
Barro´n-Ceden˜o, Rostislav Petrov, and Preslav Propaganda: WeaponsofMassSeduction. Univer-
Nakov. 2019. Fine-grained analysis of propaganda sityofMichiganPress,AnnArbor.
in news articles. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gre-
ferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguage
goryChanan,EdwardYang,ZacharyDeVito,Zem-
Processing and 9th International Joint Conference
ingLin,AlbanDesmaison,LucaAntiga,andAdam
onNaturalLanguageProcessing, EMNLP-IJCNLP
Lerer. 2017. Automatic differentiation in PyTorch.
2019, Hong Kong, China, November 3-7, 2019,
InNIPSAutodiffWorkshop.
EMNLP-IJCNLP2019,HongKong,China.
Hannah Rashkin, Eunsol Choi, Jin Yea Jang, Svitlana
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Volkova, and Yejin Choi. 2017. Truth of varying
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of shades: Analyzinglanguageinfakenewsandpolit-
deepbidirectionaltransformersforlanguageunder- icalfact-checking. InProceedingsofthe2017Con-
standing. arXivpreprintarXiv:1810.04805. ferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguage
Processing,pages2931–2937.
CharlesElkan.2001. Thefoundationsofcost-sensitive
learning. In International joint conference on ar- Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
tificial intelligence, volume 17, pages 973–978. 2015. Improving neural machine translation
LawrenceErlbaumAssociatesLtd. models with monolingual data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.06709.
Jacques Ellul. 1973. Propaganda. Random House
Stef Spronck and Tatiana Nikitina. 2019. Reported
USAInc,NewYork.
speechformsadedicatedsyntacticdomain. Linguis-
ticTypology,23(1):119–159.
Anton A. Emelyanov and Ekaterina Artemova. 2019.
Multilingual named entity recognition using pre- V. N. Volosˇinov. 1973. Marxism and the Philosophy
trained embeddings, attention mechanism and ofLanguage: StudiesinLanguage. AcademicPress
NCRF. CoRR,abs/1906.09978. Inc,NewYork.
WilliamYangWangandDiyiYang.2015. Thatssoan-
noying!!!: Alexicalandframe-semanticembedding
baseddataaugmentationapproachtoautomaticcat-
egorization of annoying behaviors using# petpeeve
tweets. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing,pages2557–2563.
Jason W Wei and Kai Zou. 2019. Eda: Easy
data augmentation techniques for boosting perfor-
mance on text classification tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.11196.
Frank Wilcoxon. 1945. Individual comparisons by
rankingmethods. Biometrics,1(6):80–83.
ZiangXie,SidaIWang,JiweiLi,DanielLe´vy,Aiming
Nie, Dan Jurafsky, and Andrew Y Ng. 2017. Data
noising as smoothing in neural network language
models. arXivpreprintarXiv:1703.02573.
Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. 2015.
Character-levelconvolutionalnetworksfortextclas-
sification. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessingsystems,pages649–657.