(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 11, 2021
Transformer based Contextual Model for Sentiment
Analysis of Customer Reviews: A Fine-tuned BERT
A Sequence Learning BERT Model for Sentiment Analysis
Ashok Kumar Durairaj1, Anandan Chinnalagu2
Department of Computer Science, Govt. Arts College
(Affiliated to Bharathidasan University Tiruchirappalli)
Kulithali, Karur, India
Abstract—The Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Model generates the symbols based on the output of
Transformers (BERT) is a state-of-the-art language model used previously generated symbols as an additional input, it uses
for multiple natural language processing tasks and sequential the auto-regressive method at each step for next generation of
modeling applications. The accuracy of predictions from context- symbols [2]. The overall Transformer architecture is based on
based sentiment and analysis of customer review data from self-attention with fully connected encoder and decode.
various social media platforms are challenging and time-
consuming tasks due to the high volumes of unstructured data. In BERT is a pre-trained, an open-sourced (Year 2018) [3]
recent years, more research has been conducted based on the and transformer-based language model from Google. It’s
recurrent neural network algorithm, Long Short-Term Memory designed to pre-train bidirectional (left and right) text
(LSTM), Bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) as well as hybrid, representations from unlabeled text [4]. The BERT and
BASE
neutral, and traditional text classification algorithms. This paper BERT are two original models. The base model consists
LARGE
presents our experimental research work to overcome these of 12 Encoders and bidirectional self-attention, while the large
known challenges of the sentiment analysis models, such as its model consists of 24 Encoders and 16 bidirectional heads.
performance, accuracy, and context-based predictions. We’ve BERT model is pre-trained on 800 million words from
proposed a fine-tuned BERT model to predict customer BooksCorpus and English Wikipedia’s unlabeled text of 2.5
sentiments through the utilization of customer reviews from
billion words. As BERT is pre-trained with large unlabeled
Twitter, IMDB Movie Reviews, Yelp, Amazon. In addition, we
text datasets, this model can be easily fine-tuned for small
compared the results of the proposed model with our custom
datasets that are specific to an NLP task like sentiment
Linear Support Vector Machine (LSVM), fastText, BiLSTM and
prediction on customer or employees’ reviews and question-
hybrid fastText-BiLSTM models, as well as presented a
answer system for chatbot applications.
comparative analysis dashboard report. This experiment result
shows that the proposed model performs better than other Fig. 2 shows the neural network architecture of BERT’s
models with respect to various performance measures. deep bidirectional and OpenAI GPT’s unidirectional (Left-to-
Right) contextual models [1], in which the unidirectional
Keywords—Transformers model; BERT; sequential model;
model generates a representation for each word based on other
deep learning; RNN; LSVM; LSTM; BiLSTM; fastText
words in the same sentence. The BERT bidirectional model
I. INTRODUCTION represents both the previous and next context in a sentence.
However, the context free Word2vec and Glove models
The RNN, LSTM, gated recurrent neural network (GRNN)
generate a word representation based on each word in the
and BiLSTM models are some of the various sequence models
vocabulary.
[1] for NLP tasks, language modeling, and machine
translation. The Google research team introduced (Year 2017) There are many organizations that rely on reviews to
the first Transformer and the first transduction model that improve customer experience and increase revenue of their
replaces the recurrent layer with attention. The first products and services. Positive sentiments are one of the key
Transformer model was used for language translation (English factors for the success of several online businesses. However,
to France and English to German) tasks and the results showed determining the context of the review, polarity, and sentiment
that it outperformed all other neural model architecture with in textual content of customer reviews remain a challenge. The
convolutional or recurrent layers [2]. Fig. 1 shows the custom and hybrid deep learning models (LSTM, BiLSTM,
Transformer architecture and the build blocks of BERT fastText and fastText-BiLSTM) perform higher in textual
model. In this Transformer architecture, input sequence datasets compare to traditional models [Naive Bays (NB),
) mapped for symbol representation of Logistic Regression (LR), Decision Tree (DT), Random
encoder to the continuous sequence representation of decoder Forest (RF), and Support Vector Machines (SVM)].
) = z the z decoder generates the
) sequence symbol of an element output at a
time.
474 | P a ge
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 11, 2021
 Train BERT-base-cased model on Twitter, IMDB
Movie Reviews, Yelp, and Amazon customer reviews
datasets to improve the accuracy and performance of
the model.
 Evaluate the custom deep learning sequential model of
BiLSTM, hybrid fastText-BiLSTM model and linear
models of LSVM, fastText models using the same
datasets.
 Compare the results of the BERT model with the
results of the deep learning sequential and linear
model.
 Customize the data pre-processing steps for hybrid and
linear model training.
 Fine-tune the hyperparameters for fastText-BiLSTM
models.
This paper presented with several recent BERT and SA
related research papers reviews and major contributions from
various researchers in Section II. The literature reviews of
BERT, fastText, BiLSTM, and LSVM models are presented in
Section III. The experimental setting and model evaluation
results are discussed in the Section IV. In Section V,
concluded this paper with model results, findings of this
research work and future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Fig. 1. Multi-layer Transformer Architecture.
Recently, many researchers evaluated BERT model for
many NLP tasks. In this section, presented most recent
research papers on SA and pre-trained BERT models.
In 2021, [5] evaluated RNN+LSTM and BERT model for
sentiment analysis to detect cyberbullying based on Twitters
Spanish language dataset. The evaluation results show the
accuracy and performance of the BERT model outperformed
RNN+LSTM by 20%. Based on evaluation the bert-base-
multilingual-uncased and Bert-large-uncased models show
more accuracy. However, BERT model requires higher
Fig. 2. BERT and OpenAI GPT Neural Network Architecture. configuration of the computational environment. A challenge
researchers face is finding the investment on a grand-scale
Evaluating Transformer based models and comparing their infrastructure to train the models. There are many BERT-
results with other state-of-the-art LTSM models are important based SA experimental research, case studies and review
for identifying the best model to utilize for Sentiment Analysis papers presented for Arabic aspect-based [6], Italian Twitter
applications. Several researchers have used traditional models SA [7] and Bangla-English Machine Translation [8].
for sentiment analysis on datasets of customer reviews and
In 2021, [9] present a large-scale open source pre-trained
discussed about their experience and issues occurred from it.
BERTweet model for English Tweets. BERTweet used for
These issues include time consumption of tasks such as data
Part of speech (POS), recognition of Named entity and text
pre-processing, preparation for testing and training the
classifications. Experimental result shows that it outperforms
datasets, as well as problems in performance and accuracy.
XLM-Rbase and RoBERTabse models, all these models are
We identified the gap in leveraging the pre-trained BERT
having a same architecture of BERT-base. There are several
model for datasets of customer reviews and found that the pre-
models available as open-sourced, whereas other models are
trained model solves the problems and issues that traditional
inaccessible to be customized for commercial use.
models have.
In 2020, [10] presented a research article about a question
The pre-trained BERT model’s performance, accuracy and
answering (QA) system based on LSTM, multilingual BERT
approach motivated the authors to experiment with this model
and BERT+vnKG models. They had used crafted Vietnam
for customer sentiment analysis. The main objectives and
tourism QA dataset for this experiment and evaluated three
contributions are as follows;
models with the same data. The experimental result shows the
 Overcome known challenges of SA model proposed model outperformed other model in terms of time
performance, accuracy and context-based prediction. and the accuracy.
475 | P a ge
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 11, 2021
In 2021, [11] conducted an Aspect-based SA study on uncased model on consumer reviews and rating dataset from
consumers product reviews data. They have proposed two Amazon, Flipkart e-commerce platforms. Binary classification
BERT models for aspect extraction, sentiment classification of consumer sentiment is categorized as positive and negative.
using parallel and hierarchical aggregation methods based on This research study results show that deep learning BERT
hierarchical transformer model [12]. The following Fig. 3 and uncased model improved performance, and higher accuracy of
Fig. 4 show the parallel and hierarchical models. Study result sentiment predictions compared [19][20] to other machine
shows that applying their proposed model approach improved learning models.
the model performance and eliminate the need of further
model training. III. PROPOSED MODEL AND METHODOLOGY
Proposed sentiment analysis frameworks and models’
architectures present with data pre-processing steps in the
following section.
A. Data Pre-processing
We’ve developed python scripts for data pre-processing
steps, customized the scripts and steps sequences based on
dataset. Our custom script consists of data cleansing, reduction
of unwanted data, data transformation and validations steps.
Fig. 3. Parallel Agrregation Model.
Fig. 4. Hierarchical Aggregation Model.
In 2021, [13] presented a research paper on attentions and
Fig. 5. Data Pre-processing Steps.
hidden representation of learned pre-trained BERT models for
aspect-based SA (ABSA) on reviews datasets. This research
The above Fig. 5 shows data pre-processing steps. For this
study found that BERT uses the aspect representation
experiment, Twitter, IMDB Movie Reviews, Yelp, Amazon
dedicated to semantics of the domain and self-attention head
customer reviews datasets are used for training and testing the
encode the context of the words. In 2021, [14] conduct a
models. To improve the data quality, model performance and
experiment based on Aspect-level SA (ABSA) using ALM-
accuracy, performed the following pre-processing tasks:
BERT model on consumer datasets, ALM-BERT model show
converted text to lowercasing text and removed stop words,
the better performance than the other models.
converted negation words to normal word, removed white
In 2021, [15] presented BERT-based SA models research spaces, special characters, punctuations, stripping recurring
paper, in this research analyzed Github, Jira web portal headers from the text and stemming.
comments and Stack Overflow posting datasets related to
B. Proposed BERT Model
Software Engineering. comments. Authors used vanilla
We propose fine-tuned BERT-base-cased model for
BERT, fine-tuned ensemble BERT and compressed
sentiment prediction on customer reviews datasets. The
DistilBERT models [16] and based on F1 score measure the
advantage of BERT model is that it was pre-trained on large
ensemble and compressed BERT models improved
corpus of raw texts data. These models are used for Masked
performance by 6-12% over other model. Another research
Language Modeling (MLM) and Next Sentence Prediction
study conduted by [17] on GitHub dataset and the exprimental
(NSP) and these pre-trained models can be fine-tuned for
results show 94% accuracy of emotion classification.
downstream applications [2]. BERT-base fine-tuned SA
In 2021, [18] published an article of SA models model framework is represented in Fig. 6. This framework
comparative analysis od machine and deep learnings models, consists of the following four components, input data pre-
SA research work carried out by using Naive Bayes (NB), processing, Tokenization of input text for model, BERT-base-
Support Vector Machine (SVM), LSTM and BERT-based cased model and classification layer.
476 | P a ge
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 11, 2021
Softmax performs the transform on
numbers.
) (2)
∑
C. FastText, BiLSTM and FastText-BiLSTM Models
The Fig. 9 shows the neural networks SA framework used
for this experimental research. These models are based on
fastText and LSTM architectures.
FastText introduce by Facebook AI research (FAIR) lab
for text representation and classification, it’s a lightweight
method and works on generic hardware with multicore CPU,
Fig. 6. BERT-base-cased Sentiment Analysis Framework. the fastText models show faster performance, accuracy during
model training and evaluation [21]. A new extension of the
The input layer generated tokens for given pre-processed
continuous skipgram and Continuous Bag of Words (CBOW)
text, the following Fig. 7 shows the embedding layers of
model like word2vec word embedding is introduced by
tokanization of sentences. The Token embeddings is the sum
fastText, where each word is represented as a bag of character
of segement and position embeddings. These embeedings are
n-grams. fastText model is Pre-Trained on Wikipedia dataset
learned specific token from WordPiece token vocabulary [4].
(294 languages) [22]. To compare with BERT model result,
To train the model on customer review dataset, we follow we evaluate customer review dataset using fastText model.
the pre-train procedure with Adam optimzer from Hugging
Authors build a two novel multilayer sequence processing
Face. following Fig. 8 shows the training history of
custom models using BiLSTM and hybrid fastText-BiLSTM.
BERTmodel on our datset, the model training result show the
it consists of two LSTM units and multilayers, one unit taking
close to 100% accuracy after 10 epochs. We’ve evaluated the
the input in a forward direction and other unit taking the input
pre-trained model and the evalution result show 95% accuracy
in a backward direction [23]. In this experiment, our main goal
on our test dataset.
is to compare the BERT model result with authors The Hybrid
Fine-tuned the hyperparameters for higher accuracy and fastText-BiLSTM and custom multilayer BiLSTM. Models
performance for customer reviews datasets. The Softmax consist of 196 memory units, 128 Embedding Layer, 5 Dense
function applied in the output layer to get the predicted Layer and Softmax activation function at output layer. The
probabilities of sentiment values. Here are the questions for LSTM unit consists of input, output and forget gates and these
probabilities and Softmax. three gates are the activation of sigmoid function; the sigmoid
output value is between 0 and 1, when gates are blocked the
(1) value is 0 and gates allow the input to pass through when the
value is 1. The following are the equations of sigmoid and
input, output and forget gates.
) (3)
) (4)
) (5)
) (6)
Fig. 7. Input Representation of BERT Model.
represents sigmoid function,
represents input at current timestamp.
represents LSTM block output of previous state at
timestamp t-1.
, are representing weight of input, forget and
output gates.
, and are representing bias for input, output, forget
gates.
Fig. 8. Model Training History.
477 | P a ge
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 11, 2021
Twitter, IMDB Movie Reviews, Yelp and Amazon customer
reviews datasets from Kaggle.com. Total 778631 customer
reviews finalized after preprocessing the raw dataset and split
the dataset 545041 (70%) for training and 233590 (30%) for
testing the models. The data pre-processing steps are
explained in the proposed model Section III. Models have
trained and tested after fine-tuning the hyper parameters.
B. Experimental Environments
Training and evaluation of the BERT model is used
through the Google Colaboratory cloud environment, while a
standard server is used for training and evaluating the
fastText, LSVM and SA-BLSTM models. Table I lists the
details and components used for this experiment.
Fig. 9. FastText, BiLSTM and FastText-BiLSTM Models.
TABLE I. EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENTS
Environment #1 Description
D. LSVM Model
Model BERT-base-cased
Linear SVM (LSVM) is a most frequently used supervised
learning algorithm for classification problems. SVM has two Transformer Hugging face
types of classifiers Linear [24] and Non-Linear. In Linear
Server Configuration Google Colab Cloud
Classifier separates the data in a liner order and a data point
PyTorch, Python 3.8.8
considered as a p-dimensional vector, but the best hyperplane Programming Language & Tool
Jupyter Notebook 6.3.0
consider one which maximize the margin. The text can be
Environment #2 Description
categorized linearly using the SVM’s linear kernel and LSVM
[25] works well with lot of features and also less parameters to Model fastText, LSVM and SA-BLSTM
optimize for training the model. We used linear kernel for this Windows 64-bit Operating System with
Server Configuration
experiment. Fig. 10 shows the LSVM architecture and SA Intel core i7 processor, 16 GB Memory.
framework used for this experiment. Word Embedding fastText Library and Keras Encoder
Python 3.8.8
Programming Language & Tool
Jupyter Notebook 6.3.0
fastText, Pandas, Numpy, Seaborn,
Libraries and Frameworks
Matplotlib, Nltk, Scikit-learn, Keras
C. Parameters Fine-tuning for Models
Table II lists the values of parameters set for these models.
TABLE II. PARAMETERS SETTINGS
Model Parameters Value
Mode Bert-base-cased
Transformer Hugging Face
Batch Size 16
Token Length 160
BERT
Epoch 10
Learning Rate 0.0002
Fig. 10. Linear SVM (LSVM) Model.
Optimizer Adam
Loss Softmax
Here is the equation for linear kernel function ),
Unigram,
given by the inner product < , and c represent the
Bigram
optional constant. LSVM Trigram
Kernel Linear
) (7)
Unigram
Bigram
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETTING AND RESULTS Trigram
fastText
Epoch 10
There are four models and two environments used for this
Learning Rate 0.01
experiment. The data source, dataset, environment settings,
Loss Softmax
fine-tuned hyperparameters and experimental results are Epoch=10 10
presented in the following sub-sections. BLSTM Learning Rate 0.01
Loss=softmax Softmax
A. Data Source and Dataset Epoch 10
There are multiple data sources are available online for fastText-BLSTM Learning Rate 0.01
Loss Softmax
customer reviews data, we have obtained publicly available
478 | P a ge
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 11, 2021
D. Performance Measures model scores F1 score of 0.89 and other models scored less
than 0.85. BERT shows the best result as a state-of-the-art
The models evaluated are based on accuracy, recall,
precision and F1 score while the performance measures are
model with respect to performance, accuracy, training and
testing on customer reviews datasets.
calculated based on the True Positive (TP), True Negative
(TN), False Positive (FP) and False Negative (TN) matrix.
The following Table III lists the values of performance
TABLE VI. COMPARE MODELS ACCURACY SCORE
measures.
Et.al Dataset Model Accuracy %
fastText
TABLE III. EVALUATION METRIC 88.23
Unigram
90.55
Bigram
Models TP FP TN FN 90.71
Trigram
BERT 102913 11089 107371 12217 LSVM
L faS sV tTM
ex t
9 15 07 77 42
51
1 18 16 68 87
0
1 90 85 11 01 86 1 14 60 31 55
1
A As nh ao nk d aa nn d T C Rw u evsit t it o ee m wr er U B Trin ig gi rg rar ama mm 8 8 97 9 0. . .7 9 14 6 1
BiLSTM 88764 25695 91100 28031 SA-BLSTM 77.00
fastText-BiLSTM 104117 9885 106036 13552 fastText-BLSTM 90.00
BERT 90.00
The following are the equations to calculate the
performance measures: SVM 85.50
Twitter
Geetika Max Entropy 83.80
Customer
(8) Gautam Review Naïve Bayes Semantic 88.20
Analysis (WordNet) 89.90
Twitter Data Hybrid Approach-
(9) Seyed-Ali
Bahrainaian
on Smart Unigram, Naive Bayes, 89.78
phones MaxEnt, SVM
(10) Twitter data Naïve Bayes 89.50
on SVM 90.00
Neethu M.S
electronic Max Entropy 90.00
products Ensemble 90.00
Unigram 81.20
The following Table IV and Table V show the Dhiraj Twitter Data Bigram 15.00
Gurkhe
performance measures and sentiment score of the models. Unigram-Bigram 67.50
TABLE IV. MODELS PERFORMANCE MEASURES V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The proposed BERT model outperforms in terms of
Model Accuracy % Recall Precision F1
accuracy and model performance compare to other models.
BERT 90% 0.91 0.90 0.90
The results of the fastText model showed low accuracy when
LSVM 86 % 0.87 0.84 0.85 unigram and bigram methods were used for training the
model. The overall model training and data preparation tasks
fastText 88% 0.87 0.89 0.88
took less time for BERT model in comparison to others. This
BiLSTM 77% 0.75 0.77 0.76 experiment reveals that the BERT model required more
fastText-BiLSTM 90% 0.87 0.91 0.89 computational resources to train compared with other
traditional models. The fastText model performed well with a
TABLE V. SENTIMENT SCORE standard server environment with minimal computational
resources compare to other models. The fine-tuned BERT
Models Positive Negative model simplifies the sentiment analysis tasks on large
BERT 49.28% 50.71% datasets.
LSVM 46.99% 53.00% A proposal for future research can be made to build
transformer models for various domains, and framework for a
fastText 52.99% 47.00%
continuous model trained to streamline data processing
BiLSTM 50.00% 50.00%
methods. In the future, more work will be done to conduct
fastText-BiLSTM 50.37% 49.62% pre-training a BERT-base model on datasets of customer
reviews for sentiment analysis and detecting emotions.
The results of the accuracy are compared with other
researchers’ model results for the same datasets. The result REFERENCES
showed BERT and fastText models’ accuracy are 90%
[1] Connor Holmes, Daniel Mawhirter, Yuxiong He, Feng Yan, Bo Wu,
compared to other models. Table VI shows the comparison of
“GRNN: Low-Latency and Scalable RNN Inference on GPUs”, In
model accuracy. Our experimental results performance Fourteenth Eurosys Conference (Eurosys ’19)
measures show that fine-tuned Pre-trained BERT model https://doi.org/10.1145/3302424.3303949, March, 2019.
scores highest F1 score of 0.90 and hybrid fastText-BiLSTM
479 | P a ge
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 12, No. 11, 2021
[2] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakon Uszkoreit, Llion [14] Guangyao Pang, Keda Lu, Xiaoying Zhu, Jie He, Zhiyi Mo, Zizhen
Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, Illia Polosukhin, “Attention is Peng, and Baoxing Pu, "Aspect-Level Sentiment Analysis Approach via
all you need”. 31st Conferencence on Neural Information Processing BERT and Aspect Feature Location Model", Hindawi, Wireless
Systems (NIPS), Long Beach, CA, USA, December, 2017. Communications and Mobile Computing, Volume 2021, Article ID
[3] Jacob Devlin and Ming-Wei Chnag, Research Scientists Google AI 5534615, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5534615. 2021.
Lanaguage, “https://ai.googleblog.com/2018/11/open-sourcing-bert- [15] Himanshu Batra, Narinder Singh Punn, Sanjay Kumar Sonbhadra, and
state-of-art-pre.html”, November 2, 2018. Accesed on 10/30/2021. Sonali Agarwal, "BERT-Based Sentiment Analysis: A Software
[4] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Engineering Perspective", Indian Institute of Information Technology
“BERT:Pre-training of Deep Birirectional Transformers for Lanaguage Allahabad, India, arXiv:2106.02581v3 [cs.CV], Jun, 2021.
Understanding” Google AI Lanaguage, arXiv:1810.04805v2 [cs.CL] 24 [16] Prakhar Ganesh, Yao Chen, Xin Lou, Mohammad Ali Khan, Yin Yang,
May, 2019. Hassan Sajjad, Preslav Nakov, Deming Chen, Marianne Winslett,
[5] Diego A. Andrade-Segarra1, Gabriel A. Leon-Paredes ´2, "Deep "Compressing Large-Scale Transformer-Based Models: A Case Study
Learning-based Natural Language Processing Methods Comparison for on BERT", https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl a 00413. Transactions of the
Presumptive Detection of Cyberbullying in Social Networks", (IJACSA) Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 9, pp. 1061–1080, Jun,
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and 2021.
Applications,Vol. 12, No. 5, May, 2021. [17] Mrityunjay Singh, Amit Kumar Jakhar, Shivam Pandey, “Sentiment
[6] Mohammed M.Abdelgwad, Taysir Hassan A Soliman, Ahmed I.Tabloba analysis on the impact of coronavirus in social life using BERT model”,
and Mohamed Fawzy Farghaly, “Arabic aspect based sentiment analysis Social Network Analysis and Mining, Licence to Springer-Verlag
using BERT”, arXiv:2107.13290v2 [cs.CL] 28 September, 2021. GmBH Austria, part os Springer Nature. February, 2021.
[7] Marco Pota, Mirko Ventura, Rosario Catelli, Massimo Esposito, “An [18] M.P.Geetha and D.Karthika Renuka, “Improving the performance of
Effective BERT-BasedPipleline for Twitter Sentiment Analysis: A Case aspect based sentiment analysis using fine-tuned Bert base Uncased
Study in Italina”, Sensors, MDPI Article, December 2020. model”, International Journal of Intelligent Networks 2 (2021) 64–69.
Jun, 2021.
[8] M. A. H. Akhand, Arna Roy, Argha Chandra Dhar and Md Abdus
Samad Kamal, " Recent Progress, Emerging Techniques, and Future [19] Fatima-ezzahra Lagrari and Youssfi Elkettani, “Customized BERT with
Research Prospects of Bangla Machine Translation: A Systematic Convolution Model: A New Heuristic Enabled Encoder for Twitter
Review", (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Sentiment Analysis”, (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced
Science and Applications, Vol. 12, No. September, 2021. Computer Science and Applications, Vol. 11, No. 10, October, 2020.
[9] Dat Quoc Nguyen, Thanh Vu and Anh Tuan Nguyen, “BERTweet: A [20] Majdi Baseiso and Saleh Alzahrani, “An Empirical Analysis of BERT
pre-trained lanaguage model for English Tweets”. Proceeding of the Embedding for Autometed Eassay Scoring”, (IJACSA) International
2020 EMNLP, pages 9-14. November 16-20, 2020. Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, Vol. 11, No.
10, October, 2020.
[10] Truong H. V Phan and Phuc Do,"BERT+vnKG: Using Deep Learning
and Knowledge Graph to Improve Vietnamese Question Answering [21] A. Joulin, E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, and T. Mikolov, “Bag of tricks for
System", (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer efficient text classification”, Facebook AI Research arXiv:1607.01759v3
Science and Applications, Vol. 11, No. 7, July, 2020. [cs.CL], August, 2016.
[11] Akbar Karimi, Leonardo Rossi, Andrea Prati, “Improving BERT [22] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov,
Performance for Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis”, Department of “Enriching Word Vectorrs with Subword Information”, Facebook AI
Engineering and Architecture, University of Parma. Italy. March, 2021. Research, arXiv:1607.04606v2 [cs.CL] 19 Jun, 2017.
[12] Luca Bacco, Andrea Cimino, Felice Dell’Orletta, and Mario Merone, [23] Karthik Gopalakrishnan and Fathi M. Salem, “Sentiment Analaysis
"Explainable Sentiment Analysis: A Hierarchical Transformer-Based Using Simplified Long Short-term Memory Recurrent Neural
Extractive Summarization Approach", MDPI, Electronics 2021, 10, Networks”, Depatment of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
2195. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics10182195. September, 2021. Michigan State University USA. arXiv:2005.03993v1[cs.CL]. May,
2020.
[13] Hu Xu, Lei Shu, Philip S. Yu, Bing Liu, “Understanding Pre-trained
BERT for Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis”, Department of Computer [24] Surbhi Arora, “SVM: Difference between Linear and Non-Linear
Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA. Proceedings of the Models”, 4 February, 2020.
28th International Conference on computational Linguistics, Barcelona, [25] Alexandre Kowalczyk, “Support Vector Machine Succinctly”,
Spain, December, 2020. Syncfusion Inc, https://www.syncfusion.com/succinctly-free-
ebooks/confirmation/support-vector-machines-succinctly October, 2017.
480 | P a ge
www.ijacsa.thesai.org