Artificial Intelligence and Law (2022) 30:417–473
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-021-09301-8
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained
language representation models with application
to the Italian civil code
Andrea Tagarelli1 · Andrea Simeri1
Accepted: 18 August 2021 / Published online: 15 September 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Modeling law search and retrieval as prediction problems has recently emerged as a
predominant approach in law intelligence. Focusing on the law article retrieval task,
we present a deep learning framework named LamBERTa, which is designed for
civil-law codes, and specifically trained on the Italian civil code. To our knowledge,
this is the first study proposing an advanced approach to law article prediction for the
Italian legal system based on a BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers) learning framework, which has recently attracted increased attention
among deep learning approaches, showing outstanding effectiveness in several natu-
ral language processing and learning tasks. We define LamBERTa models by fine-
tuning an Italian pre-trained BERT on the Italian civil code or its portions, for law
article retrieval as a classification task. One key aspect of our LamBERTa frame-
work is that we conceived it to address an extreme classification scenario, which is
characterized by a high number of classes, the few-shot learning problem, and the
lack of test query benchmarks for Italian legal prediction tasks. To solve such issues,
we define different methods for the unsupervised labeling of the law articles, which
can in principle be applied to any law article code system. We provide insights into
the explainability and interpretability of our LamBERTa models, and we present an
extensive experimental analysis over query sets of different type, for single-label as
well as multi-label evaluation tasks. Empirical evidence has shown the effectiveness
of LamBERTa, and also its superiority against widely used deep-learning text clas-
sifiers and a few-shot learner conceived for an attribute-aware prediction task.
Keywords Law article retrieval · Deep learning · Deep pre-trained language
models · BERT · Text classification · Italian civil code
*
Andrea Tagarelli
tagarelli@dimes.unical.it
1 Department of Computer Engineering, Modeling, Electronics, and Systems Engineering
(DIMES), University of Calabria, 87036 Rende, CS, Italy
Vol.:(012134 536789)
418 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
1 Introduction
The general purpose of law search is to recognize legal authorities that are rel-
evant to a question expressing a legal matter (Dadgostari et al. 2021). The inter-
pretative uncertainty in law, particularly that related to the jurisprudential type
which is capable of directly affecting citizens, has prompted many to model law
search as a prediction problem (Dadgostari et al. 2021). Ultimately, this would
allow lawyers and legal practitioners to explore the possibility of predicting the
outcome of a judgment (e.g., the probable sentence relating to a specific case),
through the aid of computational methods, also sometimes referred to as pre-
dictive justice (Viola 2017). Predictive justice is currently being developed, to a
prevalent extent, following a statistical-jurisprudential approach: the jurispruden-
tial precedents are verified and future decisions are predicted on their basis. How-
ever, as stated by legal professionals (Viola 2017), several reasons point out that
this approach should not be preferred, because of its limited scope only to cases
in which there are numerous precedents, so as to exclude unprecedented cases
relating to new regulations, not yet subject to stratified jurisprudential guidelines.
In fact, the jurisprudential approach is not in line with any civil law system—
which is adopted in most European Union states and non-Anglophone countries
in the world—with the consequence of a high risk of fallacy (i.e., repetition of
errors based on precedents) and risk of standardization (i.e., if a lawsuit is con-
trary to many precedents, then no one will propose such a lawsuit).
Clearly, from a major perspective as a data-driven artificial-intelligence task,
predicting judicial decisions is carried out exclusively based on the legal corpora
available and the selected algorithms to use, as remarked by Medvedeva et al.
(2020). Moreover, as also witnessed by an increased interest from the artificial
intelligence and law research community, a key perspective in legal analysis and
problem solving lays on the opportunities given by advanced, data-driven com-
putational approaches based on natural language processing (NLP), data mining,
and machine learning disciplines (Conrad and Branting 2018).
Predictive tasks in legal information systems have often been addressed as text
classification problems, ranging from case classification and legal judgment pre-
diction (Nallapati and Manning 2008; Liu and Hsieh 2006; Lin et al. 2012; Ale-
tras et al. 2016; Sulea et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Medvedeva et al. 2020), to
legislation norm classification (Boella et al. 2011), and statute prediction (Liu
et al. 2015). Early studies have focused on statistical textual features and machine
learning methods, then the progress of deep learning methods for text classifica-
tion (Goodfellow et al. 2016; Goldberg 2017) has prompted the development of
deep neural network frameworks, such as recurrent neural networks, for single-
task learning [e.g., charge prediction (Luo et al. 2017; Ye et al. 2018), sentence
modality classification (O’Neill et al. 2017; Chalkidis et al. 2018), legal question
answering (Do et al. 2017)] or even multi-task learning (e.g., Yang et al. (2019),
Zhou et al. (2019)).
More recently, deep pre-trained language models, particularly the Bidirec-
tional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) (Devlin et al. 2019),
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 419
have emerged showing outstanding effectiveness in several NLP tasks. Thanks to
their ability to learn a contextual language understanding model, these models
overcome the need for feature engineering (upon which classic, sparse vectorial
representation models rely). Nonetheless, since they are originally trained from
generic domain corpora, they should not be directly applied to a specific domain
corpus, as the distributional representation (embeddings) of their lexical units
may significantly shift from the nuances and peculiarities expressed in domain-
specific texts—and this certainly holds for the legal domain as well, where inter-
preting and relating documents is particularly challenging.
Developing BERT models for legal texts has very recently attracted increased
attention, mostly concerning classification problems (e.g., Rabelo et al. 2019;
Chalkidis et al. 2019a; Sanchez et al. 2020; Shao et al. 2020; Chalkidis et al. 2020;
Yoshioka et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2021). Our research falls into this context, as we
propose a BERT-based framework for law article retrieval based on civil-law-based
corpora. More specifically, as we wanted to benefit from the essential consultation
provided by law professionals in our country, our proposed framework is completely
specified using the Italian Civil Code (ICC) as the target legal corpus. Notably, only
few works have been developed for Italian BERT-based models, such as a retrained
BERT for various NLP tasks on Italian tweets (Polignano et al. 2019), and a BERT-
based masked-language model for spell correction (Puccinelli et al. 2019); however,
no study leveraging BERT for the Italian civil-law corpus has been proposed so far.
Our main contributions in this work are summarized as follows:
• We push forward research on law document analysis for civil law systems, focus-
ing on the modeling, learning and understanding of logically coherent corpora of
law articles, using the Italian Civil Code as case in point.
• We study the law article retrieval task as a prediction problem based on the deep
machine learning paradigm. More specifically, following the lastest advances in
research on deep neural network models for text data, we propose a deep pre-
trained contextualized language model framework, named LamBERTa (Law
article mining based on BERT architecture). LamBERTa is designed to fine-
tune an Italian pre-trained BERT on the ICC corpora for law article retrieval as
prediction, i.e., given a natural language query, predict the most relevant ICC
article(s).
• Notably, we deal with a very challenging prediction task, which is characterized
not only by a high number (i.e., hundreds) of classes—as many as the number
of articles—but also by the issues that arise from the need for building suita-
ble training sets given the lack of test query benchmarks for Italian legal arti-
cle retrieval/prediction tasks. This also leads to coping with few-shot learning
issues (i.e., learning models to predict the correct class of instances when a small
amount of examples are available in the training dataset), which has been rec-
ognized as one of the so-called extreme classification scenarios (Bengio et al.
2019; Chalkidis et al. 2019b). We design our LamBERTa framework to solve
such issues based on different schemes of unsupervised training-instance labe-
ling that we originally define for the ICC corpus, although they can easily be
generalized to other law code systems.
1 3
420 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
• We address one crucial aspect that typically arises in deep/machine learning
models, namely explainability, which is clearly of interest also in artificial intel-
ligence and law (e.g., Branting et al. 2019; Hacker et al. 2020). In this regard, we
investigate explainability of our LamBERTa models focusing on the understand-
ing of how they form complex relationships between the textual tokens. We fur-
ther provide insights into the patterns generated by LamBERTa models through
a visual exploratory analysis of the learned representation embeddings.
• We present an extensive, quantitative experimental analysis of LamBERTa
models by considering:
• six different types of test queries, which vary by originating source, length
and lexical characteristics, and include comments about the ICC articles as
well as case law decisions from the civil section of the Italian Court of Cassa-
tion that contain significant jurisprudential sentences associated with the ICC
articles;
• single-label evaluation as well as multi-label evaluation tasks;
• different sets of assessment criteria.
The obtained results have shown the effectiveness of LamBERTa, and its
superiority against (i) widely used deep-learning text classifiers that have been
tested on our different query sets for the article prediction tasks, and against (ii)
a few-shot learner conceived for an attribute-aware prediction task that we have
newly designed based on the availability of ICC metadata.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews recent
works that address legal classification and retrieval problems based on deep learn-
ing methods. Section 3 describes the ICC corpus, and Sect. 4 presents our proposed
framework for the civil-law article retrieval problem. Sections 5 and 6 are devoted
to qualitative investigations on the explainability and interpretability of LamBERTa
models. Quantitative experimental evaluation methodology and results are instead
presented in Sects. 7 and 8. Finally, Sect. 9 concludes the paper.
2 Related work
Our work belongs to the corpus of studies that reflect the recent revival of interest in
the role that machine learning, particularly deep neural network models, can take on
artificial intelligence applications for text data in a variety of domains, including the
legal one. In this regard, here we overview recent research works that employ deep
learning methods for addressing computational problems in the legal domain, with
a focus on classification and retrieval tasks. Note that the latter are major categories
for the data-driven legal analysis literature review, along with entailment and infor-
mation extraction based on NLP approaches (e.g., named entity recognition, relation
extraction, tagging), as extensively studied by Chalkidis and Kampas in Chalkidis
and Kampas (2019), to which we refer the interested reader for a broader overview.
Most existing works on deep-learning-based law analysis exploit recurrent
neural network models (RNNs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 421
along with the classic multi-layer perceptron (MLP). For instance, O’Neill et al.
(2017) utilize all the above methods for classifying deontic modalities in regula-
tory texts, demonstrating superiority of neural network models over competitive
classifiers including ensemble-based decision tree and largest margin classifiers.
Focusing on obligation and prohibition extraction as a particular case of deontic
sentence classification, Chalkidis et al. (2018) show the benefits of employing
a hierarchical attention-based bidirectional LSTM model that considers both the
sequence of words in each sentence and the sequence of sentences. Branting et al.
(2017) consider administrative adjudication prediction in motion-rulings, Board
of Veterans Appeals issue decisions, and World Intellectual Property Organiza-
tion domain name dispute decisions. In this regard, three approaches for pre-
diction are evaluated: maximum entropy over token n-grams, SVM over token
n-grams, and a hierarchical attention network (Yang et al. 2016) applied to the
full text. While no absolute winner was observed, the study highlights the benefit
of using feature weights or network attention weights from these predictive mod-
els to identify salient phrases in motions or contentions and case facts. Nguyen
et al. (2017, 2018) propose several approaches to train long short term memory
(LSTMs) models and conditional random field (CRF) models for the problem of
identifying two key portions of legal documents, i.e., requisite and effectuation
segments, with evaluation on Japanese civil code and Japanese National Pension
Law dataset. In Chalkidis and Kampas (2019) by Chalkidis and Kampas, a major
contribution is the development of word2vec skip-gram embeddings trained on
large legal corpora (mostly from European, UK, and US legislations).
Note that our work is clearly different from the aforementioned ones, since they
not only focus on legal corpora other than Italian civil law articles but also they
consider machine learning and neural network models that do not exploit the same
ability as pre-trained deep language models.
To address the problem of predicting the final charges according to the fact
descriptions in criminal cases, Hu et al. (2018) propose to exploit a set of categorical
attributes to discriminate among charges (e.g., violence, death, profit purpose, buy-
ing and selling). By leveraging these annotations of charges based on representative
attributes, the proposed learning framework aims to predict attributes and charges
of a case simultaneously. An attribute attention mechanism is first applied to select
factual information from facts that are relevant to each particular attribute, so to
generate attribute-aware fact representations that can be used to predict the label of
an attribute, under a binary classification task. Then, for the task of charge predic-
tion, the attribute-aware fact representations aggregated by average pooling are also
concatenated with the attribute-free fact representations produced by a conventional
LSTM neural network. The training objective is twofold, as it minimizes the cross-
entropy loss of charge prediction and the cross-entropy loss of attribute prediction.
It should be noticed that the above study was especially designed to deal with
the typical imbalance of the case numbers of various charges as well as to distin-
guish related or “confusing” charges. In particular, the first aspect corresponds to a
challenge of insufficient training data for some charges, as there are indeed charges
with limited cases. This appears to be in analogy with the few-shot learning sce-
nario in law article prediction; therefore, in Sect. 8.3, we shall present a comparative
1 3
422 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
evaluation stage with the method in Hu et al. (2018) adapted for the ICC law article
prediction task.
Also in the context of legal judgment prediction, Li et al. (2019) propose a mul-
tichannel attention-based neural network model, dubbed MANN, that exploits not
only the case facts but also information on the defendant persona, such as traits
that determine the criminal liability (e.g., age, health condition, mental status) and
criminal records. A two-tier structure is used to empower attention-based sequence
encoders to hierarchically model the semantic interactions from different parts of
case description. Results on datasets of criminal cases in mainland China have
shown improvements over other neural network models for judgment prediction,
althugh MANN may suffer from the imbalanced classes of prison terms and cannot
deal with criminal cases with multiple defendants. More recently, Gan et al. (2021)
have proposed to inject legal knowledge into a neural network model to improve
performance and interpretability of legal judgment prediction. The key idea is to
model declarative legal knowledge as a set of first-order logic rules and integrate
these logic rules into a co-attention network based model (i.e., bidirectional infor-
mation flows between facts and claims) in an end-to-end way. The method has been
evaluated on a collection of private loan law cases, where each instance in the data-
set consists of a fact description and the plaintiff’s multiple claims, demonstrating
some advantage over AutoJudge (Long et al. 2019), which models the interactions
between claims and fact descriptions via pair-wise attention in a judgment predic-
tion task.
The above two works are distant from ours, not only in terms of the target corpora
and addressed problems but also since we do not use any type of information other
than the text of the articles, nor any injected knowledge base.
In the last few years, the Competition on Legal Information Extraction/ Entail-
ment (COLIEE) has been an important venue for displaying studies focused on case/
statute law retrieval, entailment, and question answering. In most works appeared
in the most recent COLIEE editions, the observed trend is to tackle the retrieval
task by using CNNs and RNNs in the entailment phase, possibly in combination of
additional features produced by applying classic term relevance weighting methods
(e.g., TF-IDF, BM25) or statistical topic models (e.g., Latent Dirichlet Allocation).
For instance, Kim et al. (2015) propose a binary CNN-based classifier model for
answering to the legal queries in the entailment phase. The entailment model intro-
duced by Morimoto et al. (2017) is instead based on MLP incorporating the atten-
tion mechanism. Nanda et al. (2017) adopt a combination of partial string match-
ing and topic clustering for the retrieval task, while they combine LSTM and CNN
models for the entailment phase. Do et al. (2017) propose a CNN binary model with
additional TF-IDF and statistical latent semantic features.
The aforementioned studies differ from ours as they mostly focus on CNN and
RNN based neural network models, which are indeed used as competing methods
against our proposed deep-pretrained language model framework (cf. Sect. 8.3).
Exploiting BERT for law classification tasks has recently attracted much atten-
tion. Besides a study on Japanese legal term correction proposed by Yamakoshi
et al. (2019), a few very recent works address sentence-pair classification problems
in legal information retrieval and entailment scenarios. Rabelo et al. (2019) propose
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 423
to combine similarity based features and BERT fine-tuned to the task of case law
entailment on the data provided by the Competition on Legal Information Extrac-
tion/Entailment (COLIEE), where the input is an entailed fragment from a case cou-
pled with a candidate entailing paragraph from a noticed case. Sanchez et al. (2020)
employ BERT in its regression form to learn complex relevance criteria to support
legal search over news articles. Specifically, the input consists of a query-document
pair, and the output is a predicted relevance score. Results have shown that BERT
trained either on a combined title and summary field of documents or on the docu-
ments’ contents outperform a learning-to-rank approach based on LambdaMART
equipped with features engineered upon three groups of relevance criteria, namely
topical relevance, factual information, and language quality. However, in legal case
retrieval, the query case is typically much longer and more complex than common
keyword queries, and the definition of relevance between a query case and a sup-
porting case could be beyond general topical relevance, which makes it difficult
to build a large-scale case retrieval dataset. To address this challenge, Shao et al.
(2020) propose a BERT framework to model semantic relationships to infer the rel-
evance between two cases by aggregating paragraph-level dependencies. To this
purpose, the BERT model is fine-tuned with a relatively small-scale case law entail-
ment dataset to adapt it to the legal scenario. Experiments conducted on the bench-
mark of the relevant case retrieval task in COLIEE 2019 have shown effectiveness
of the proposed BERT model.
We notice that the above two works require to classify query-document pairs (i.e.,
pairs of query and news article, in Sanchez et al. (2020), or pairs of case law docu-
ments, in Shao et al. (2020)), whereas our models are trained by using articles only.
At the time of submission of this article, we also become aware of a small bunch
of works presented at COLIEE-2020 that compete for the statute law retrieval and
question answering (statute entailment) tasks1 using BERT (Rabelo et al. 2020).
In particular, for the statute law retrieval task, the goal is to read a legal bar exam
question and retrieve a subset of Japanese civil code articles to judge whether the
question is entailed or not. The BERT-based approach has shown to improve overall
retrieval performance, although there are still numbers of questions that are difficult
to retrieve by BERT too. At COLIEE-2021, which was held in June 2021,2 there has
been an increased attention and development of BERT-based methods to address the
statute and case law processing tasks (Yoshioka et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2021).
Again, it should be noted that the above works at COLIEE Competitions assume
that the training data are questions and relevant article pairs, whereas our training
data instances are derived from articles only. Nonetheless, we recognize that some
of the techniques introduced at COLIEE-2021, such as deploying weighted aggrega-
tion on models’ predictions and the iterated self-labeled and fine-tuning process, are
worthy of investigation and we shall delve into them in our future research.
In addition to the COLIEE Competitions, it is worth mentioning the study by
Chalkidis et al. (2019a), which provides a threefold contribution. They release a new
1 https:// sites. ualbe rta. ca/ ~rabelo/ COLIE E2020/.
2 https:// sites. ualbe rta. ca/ ~rabelo/ COLIE E2021/.
1 3
424 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
dataset of cases from the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) for legal judg-
ment prediction, which is larger (about 11.5k cases) than earlier datasets, and such
that each case along with its list of facts is mapped to articles violated (if any) and is
assigned an ECHR importance score. The dataset is used to evaluate a selection of
neural network models, for different tasks, namely binary classification (i.e., whether
a case violates a human rights article or not), multi-label classification (i.e., which
types of violation, if any), and case importance detection. Results have shown that
the neural network models outperform an SVM model with bag-of-words features,
which was previously used in related work such as (Aletras et al. 2016). Moreover,
a hierarchical version of BERT, dubbed HIER-BERT, is proposed to overcome the
BERT’s maximum length limitation, by first generating fact embeddings and then
using them through a self-attention mechanism to produce case embeddings, simi-
larly to a hierarchical attention network model (Yang et al. 2016).
The latter aspect on the use of a hierarchical attention mechanism, especially
when integrated into BERT, is very interesting and useful on long legal documents,
such as case law documents, to improve the performance of pre-trained language
models like BERT that are designed with constraints on the tokenized text length.
Nonetheless, as we shall discuss later in Sect. 4.4, this contingency does not rep-
resent an issue in the setting of our proposed framework, due not only to the char-
acteristic length of ICC articles but also to our designed schemes of unsupervised
training-instance labeling.
3 Data
The Italian Civil Code (ICC) is divided into six, logically coherent books, each in
charge of providing rules for a particular civil law theme:
• Book-1, on Persons and the Family, articles 1-455–contains the discipline of the
juridical capacity of persons, of the rights of the personality, of collective organi-
zations, of the family;
• Book-2, on Successions, articles 456-809—contains the discipline of succession
due to death and the donation contract;
• Book-3, on Property, articles 810-1172—contains the discipline of ownership
and other real rights;
• Book-4, on Obligations, articles 1173-2059—contains the discipline of obliga-
tions and their sources, that is mainly of contracts and illicit facts (the so-called
civil liability);
• Book-5, on Labor, articles 2060-2642—contains the discipline of the company in
general, of subordinate and self-employed work, of profit-making companies and
of competition;
• Book-6, on the Protection of Rights, articles 2643-2969—contains the discipline
of the transcription, of the proofs, of the debtor’s financial liability and of the
causes of pre-emption, of the prescription.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 425
Table 1 Main statistics on the ICC corpus and its constituent books
ICC #Arts. #Sentences over the articles #Words over the articles
portion tot. min max mean (std) tot. min max mean (std)
Book-1 395 1979 3 21 5.010 (2.323) 32,354 11 569 81.909 (71.952)
Book-2 345 1561 3 13 4.525 (1.675) 24,520 9 354 71.072 (51.366)
Book-3 364 1619 3 24 4.448 (1.816) 25,971 6 893 71.349 (65.836)
Book-4 891 3595 3 12 4.035 (1.338) 50,509 7 365 56.688 (38.837)
Book-5 713 3937 3 37 5.522 (3.191) 75,764 8 1465 106.261 (117.393)
Book-6 331 1453 3 17 4.390 (1.895) 25,937 12 654 78.360 (76.954)
All 3039 14,131 3 37 4.650 (2.243) 234,945 6 1465 77.310 (78.373)
The articles of each book are internally organized into a hierarchical structure
based on four levels of division, namely (from top to bottom in the hierarchy):
“titoli” (i.e., chapters), “capi” (i.e., subchapters), “sezioni” (i.e., sections), and
“paragrafi” (i.e., paragraphs). It should however be emphasized that this hierar-
chical classification was not meant as a crisp, ground-truth organization of the
articles’ contents: indeed, the topical boundaries of contiguous chapters and
subchapters are often quite smooth, as articles in the same group often not only
vary in length but can also provide dispositions that are more related to articles in
other groups.
The ICC is obviously publicly available, in various digital formats. From one
of such sources, we extracted article id, title and content of each article. We
cleaned up the text from non-ASCII characters, removed numbers and date, nor-
malized all variants and abbreviations of frequent keywords such as “articolo”
(i.e., article), “decreto legislativo” (i.e., legislative decree), “Gazzetta Ufficiale”
(i.e., Official Gazette), and finally we lowercased all letters.
The ICC currently in force was enacted by Royal decree no. 262 of 16 March
1942, and it consists of 2969 articles. This number actually corresponds to 3225
articles considering all variants and subsequent insertions, which are designated
by using Latin-term suffixes (e.g., “bis”, “ter”, “quater”). However, during its his-
tory, the ICC was revised several times and subjected to repealings, i.e., per-arti-
cle partial or total insertions, modifications and removals; to date, 2294 articles
have been repealed. Table 1 summarizes main statistics on the preprocessed ICC
books.
4 The proposed LamBERTa framework
In this section we present our proposed learning framework for civil-law article
retrieval. We first formulate the problem statement in Sect. 4.1 and overview the
framework in Sect. 4.2. We present our devised learning approaches in Sect. 4.3.
We describe the data preparation and preprocessing in Sect. 4.4, then in Sect. 4.5
1 3
426 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
we define our unsupervised training-instance labeling methods for the articles in
the target corpus. Finally, in Sect. 4.6, we discuss major settings of the proposed
framework.
4.1 Problem setting
Our study is concerned with law article retrieval, i.e., finding articles of interest
out of a legal corpus that can be recommended as an appropriate response to a
query expressing a legal matter.
To formalize this problem, we assume that any query is expressed in natural
language and discusses a legal subject that is in principle covered by the target
legal corpus (i.e., the ICC, in our context). Moreover, a query is assumed to be
free of references to any article identifier in the ICC.
We address the law article retrieval task based on the supervised machine
learning paradigm: given a new, user-provided instance, i.e., a legal question,
the goal is to automatically predict the category associated to the posed ques-
tion. More precisely, we deal with the more general case in which a probabil-
ity distribution over all the predefined categories is computed in response to a
query. The prediction is carried out by a machine learning system that is trained
on a target legal corpus—whose documents, i.e., articles, are annotated with the
actual category they belong to—in order to learn a computational model, also
called classifier, that will then be used to perform the predictions against legal
queries by exclusively utilizing the textual information contained in the annotated
documents.
4.1.1 Motivations for BERT‑based approach
In this respect, our objective is to leverage deep neural-network-based, pre-trained
language modeling to solve the law article retrieval task. This has a number of
key advantages that are summarized as follows. First, like any other deep neural
network models, it totally avoids manual feature engineering, and hence the need
for employing feature selection methods as well as feature relevance measures
(e.g., TF-IDF). Second, like sophisticated recurrent and convolutional neural net-
works, it models language semantics and non-linear relationships between terms;
however, better than recurrent and convolutional neural networks and their com-
binations, it is able to capture subtle and complex lexical patterns including the
sequential structure and long-term dependencies, thus obtaining the most com-
prehensive local and global feature representations of a text sequence. Third, it
incorporates the so-called attention mechanism, which allows a learning model
to assign higher weight to text features according to their higher informativeness
or relevance to the learning task. Fourth, being a real bidirectional Transformer
model, it overcomes the main limitations of early deep contextualized models like
ELMO (Peters et al. 2018) (whose left-to-right language model and right-to-left
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 427
language model are actually independently trained) or decoder-based Transformer
models, like OpenAI GPT (Radford and Sutskever 2018).
4.1.2 Challenges
It should however be noted that, like any other machine learning method, using
deep pre-trained models like BERT for classification tasks normally requires the
availability of data annotated with the class labels, so to design the independent
training and testing phases for the classifier. However, this does not apply to our
context.
As previously mentioned, in this work we face three main challenges:
• the first challenge refers to the high number (i.e., hundreds) of classes, which
correspond to the number of articles in the ICC corpus, or portion of it, that is
used to train a LamBERTa model;
• the second challenge corresponds to the so-called few-shot learning problem,
i.e., dealing with a small amount of per-class examples to train a machine learn-
ing model, which Bengio et al. recognize as one of the “extreme classification”
scenarios (Bengio et al. 2019).
• the third challenge derives from the unavailability of test query benchmarks for
Italian legal article retrieval/prediction tasks. This has prompted us to define
appropriate methods for data annotation, thus for building up training sets for the
LamBERTa framework. To address this problem, we originally define different
schemes of unsupervised training-instance labeling; notably, these are not ad-
hoc defined for the ICC corpus, rather they can be adapted to any other law code
corpus.
In the following, we overview our proposed deep pre-trained model based frame-
work that is designed to address all the above challenges.
4.2 Overview of the LamBERTa framework
Figure 1 shows the conceptual architecture of our proposed LamBERTa – Law arti-
cle mining based on BERT architecture. The starting point is a pre-trained Italian
BERT model whose source data consists of a recent Wikipedia dump, various texts
from the OPUS corpora collection, and the Italian part of the OSCAR corpus; the
final training corpus has a size of 81GB and 13 138 379 147 tokens.3
LamBERTa models are generated by fine-tuning the pre-trained Italian BERT
model on a sequence classification task (i.e., BERT with a single linear classifica-
tion layer on top) given in input the articles of the ICC or a portion of it.
3 bert-base-italian-xxl-uncased, available at https:// huggi ngface. co/ dbmdz/.
1 3
428 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
Fig. 1 An illustration of the conceptual architecture of LamBERTa designed for the ICC law article
retrieval task
It is worth noting that the LamBERTa architecture is versatile w.r.t. the adopted
learning approach and the training-instance labeling scheme for a given corpus of
ICC articles. These aspects are elaborated on next.
4.3 Global and local learning approaches
We consider two learning approaches, here dubbed global and local learning,
respectively. A global model is trained on the whole ICC, whereas a local model is
trained on a particular book of the ICC.4 Our rationale underlying this choice is as
follows:
• on the one hand, local models are designed to embed the logical coherence of the
articles within a particular book and, although limited to its corresponding topi-
4 From a technical viewpoint, the considered portion could in principle include any strict subset of the
ICC; however, on the legal domain side, it is reasonable to learn local models each dedicated to a logi-
cally coherent subset of the whole civil code, i.e., a single book.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 429
Table 2 Number of domain-
ICC #Added Vocab.
specific tokens to inject into the
pre-trained BERT vocabulary Portion Tokens Size
and the final vocabulary size
Book-1 833 31,935
Book-2 698 31,800
Book-3 1072 32,174
Book-4 1383 32,485
Book-5 2048 33,150
Book-6 829 31,931
All 3993 35,095
cal boundaries, they are expected to leverage the multi-faceted semantics under-
lying a specific civil law theme (e.g., inheritage);
• on the other hand, books are themselves part of the same law code, and hence a
global model might be useful to capture possible interrelations between the sin-
gle books, however, by embedding different topic signals from different books
(e.g. inheritage of Book-2 vs. labor law of Book-5), it could incur the risk of topi-
cal dilution over all the ICC.
Either type of model is designed to be a classifier at article level, i.e., class labels
correspond to the articles in the book(s) covered by the model. Given the one-to-one
association between classes and articles, a question becomes how to create suitable
training sets for our LamBERTa models. Our key idea is to adopt an unsupervised
annotation approach, which is discussed in the next section.
4.4 Data preparation
To tailor the ICC articles to the BERT input format, we initially carried out seg-
mentation of the content of each article into sentences. This was then followed by
tokenization of the sentences and text encoding, which are described next.
4.4.1 Domain‑specific terms injection and tokenization
BERT was trained using the WordPiece tokenization. This is an effective way to
alleviate the open vocabulary problems in neural machine translation, since a word
can be broken down into sub-word units, which are constructed during the training
time and depend on the corpus the model was initially trained on.
However, when retraining BERT on the ICC articles to learn global as well as
local models, it is likely that some important terms occurring in the legal texts are
missing in the pre-trained lexicon; therefore, to make BERT aware of the domain-
specific (i.e., legal) terms and avoid subwording such terms thus disrupting their
1 3
430 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
semantics, we injected a selection of terms from the ICC articles into the pre-exist-
ing BERT vocabulary before tokenization.5
To select the domain-specific terms to be added, we carried out the following
steps: if we denote with D the input (portion of) ICC text for the model to learn, we
first preprocessed the text D as described in Sect. 3, then we removed Italian stop-
words, and finally filtered out overly frequent terms (as occurring in more than 50%
of the articles in D) as well as hapax terms. Table 2 reports the number of added
tokens and the final number of tokens, for each input corpus to our LamBERTa
local and global models.
4.4.2 Text encoding
BERT utilizes a fixed sequence size (usually 512) for each tokenized text, which
implies both padding of shorter sequences and truncation of longer sequences.
While padding has no side effect, truncation may produce loss of information.
In learning our models, we wanted to avoid the above aspect, therefore we inves-
tigated any condition causing such undesired effect in our input data. We found out
that this contingency is very rare in each book of the ICC, even reducing the maxi-
mum length to 256 tokens; the only situation that would lead to truncation corre-
sponds to an article sentence that is logically organized in multiple clauses separated
by semicolon: for these cases, we treated each of the subsentences as one training
unit associated with the same article class-label.
4.5 Methods for unsupervised training‑instance labeling
As previously discussed, our LamBERTa classification models are trained in such
a way that it holds an one-to-one correspondence between articles in a target corpus
and class labels. Moreover, the entire corpus must be used to train the model so to
embed the whole knowledge therein. However, given the uniqueness of each article,
the general problem we face is how to create as many training instances as possible
for each article to effectively train the models.
Our key idea is to select and combine portions of each article to generate the
training units for it. To this aim, we devise different unsupervised schemes for data
labeling the ICC articles to create the training sets of LamBERTa models. Our
schemes adopt different strategies for selecting and combining portions of each arti-
cle to derive the training sets, but they share the requirements of generating a mini-
mum number of training units per article, here denoted as minTU; moreover, since
each article is usually comprised of few sentences, and minTU needs to be relatively
large (we chose 32 as default value), each of the schemes implements a round-robin
(RR) method that iterates over replicas of the same group of training units per article
until at least minTU are generated.
5 From the perspective of the BERT architecture, this implies two actions, namely indexing the added
terms and initializing their corresponding weights.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 431
In the following, we define our methods for unsupervised training-instance labe-
ling of the ICC articles (in square brackets, we indicate the notation that will be used
throughout the remainder of the paper):
• Title-only [T]. This is the simplest yet lossy scheme, which keeps an article’s title
while discarding its content; the round-robin block is just the title of an article.6
• n-gram. Each training unit corresponds to n consecutive sentences of an arti-
cle; the round-robin block starts with the n-gram containing the title and ends
with the n-gram containing the last sentence of the article. We set n∈{1,2,3} ,
i.e., we consider a unigram [UniRR], a bigram [BiRR], and a trigram [TriRR]
model, respectively.
• Cascade [CasRR]. The article’s sentences are cumulatively selected to form the
training units; the round-robin block starts with the first sentence (i.e., the title),
then the first two sentences, and so on until all article’s sentences are considered
to form a single training unit.
• Triangle [TglRR]. Each training unit is either an unigram, a bigram or a trigram,
i.e., the round-robin block contains all n-grams, with n∈{1,2,3} , that can be
extracted from the article’s title and description.
• Unigram with parameterized emphasis on the title [UniRR.T+ ]. The set of
training units is comprised of one subset containing the article’s sentences with
round-robin selection, and another subset containing only replicas of the article’s
title. More specifically, the two subsets are formed as follows:
• The first subset is of size equal to the maximum between the number of arti-
cle’s sentences and the quantity m×mean_s , where m is a multiplier (set to 4
as default) and
mean_s
expresses the average number of sentences per article,
excluding the title. As reported in Table 1 (sixth column), this mean value
can be recognized between 3 and 4—recall that the title is excluded from the
count— therefore we set
mean_s∈{3,4}.
• The second subset finally contains
minTU−m×mean_s
replicas of the title.
• Cascade with parameterized emphasis on the title [CasRR.T+ ] and Triangle
with parameterized emphasis on the title [TglRR.T+ ]. These two schemes fol-
+
low the same approach as UniRR.T except for the composition of the round-
robin block, which corresponds to CasRR and TglRR, respectively, with the
title left out from this block and replicated in the second block, for each article.
4.6 Learning configuration
An input to LamBERTa is of the form [CLS, ⟨text⟩ , SEP], where CLS (stands for
‘classification’) and SEP are special tokens respectively at the beginning of each
sequence and at separation of two parts of the input. These two special tokens are
6 We point out that considering also the title of the group to which an article belongs (e.g., chapter,
subchapter) would not add further information, since each article’s title recalls yet specializes its group’s
title.
1 3
432 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
associated with two vectorial dense representations or embeddings, denoted as
E E E
[CLS] and [SEP] , respectively; analogously, there are as many embeddings i as the
number of tokens of the input text. Note also that as discussed in Sect. 4.4, each
sequence in a mini-batch is padded to the maximum length (e.g., 256 tokens) in the
E T
batch. In correspondence of each input embedding i , an embedding i is outputted,
and it can be seen as the contextual representation of the i-th token of the input text.
Instead, the final hidden state, i.e., output embedding C, corresponding to the CLS
token captures the high level representation of the entire text to be used as input to
further levels in order to train any sentence-based task, such as sentence classifica-
tion. This vector, which is by design of size 768, is fed to a single layer neural net-
work followed by sigmoid activation whose output represents the distribution prob-
ability over the law articles of a book.
LamBERTa models were trained using a typical configuration of BERT for
masked language modeling, with 12 attention heads and 12 hidden layers, and ini-
tial (i.e., pre-trained) vocabulary of 32 102 tokens. Each model was trained for 10
epochs, using cross-entropy as loss function, Adam optimizer and initial learning
rate selected within [1e-5, 5e-5] on batches of 256 examples.
It should be noted that our LamBERTa models can be seen as relatively light in
terms of computational requirements, since we developed them under the Google
Colab GPU-based environment with a limited memory of 12 GB and 12-hour limit
for continuous assignment of the virtual machine.7
5 E xplainability of LamBERTa models based on Attention Patterns
In this section, we start our understanding of what is going on inside the “black box”
of LamBERTa models. One important aspect is the explainability of LamBERTa
models, which we investigate here focusing on the formation of complex relation-
ships between tokens.
Like any BERT-based architecture, our LamBERTa leverages the Transformer
paradigm, which allows for processing all elements simultaneously by forming
direct connections between individual elements through a mechanism known as
attention. Attention is a way for a model to assign weight to input features (i.e., parts
of the texts) based on their high informativeness or importance to some task. In par-
ticular, attention enables the model to understand how the words relate to each other
in the context of the sentence, by forming composite representations that the model
can reason about.
BERT’s attention patterns can assume several forms, such as delimiter-focused,
bag-of-words, and next-word patterns. Through the lens of the bertviz visualiza-
tion tool,8 we show how LamBERTa forms its distinctive attention patterns. For this
purpose, here we present a selection of examples built upon sentences from Book-2
7 https:// colab. resea rch. google. com/.
8 https:// github. com/ jesse vig/ bertv iz.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 433
Fig. 2 Attention patterns for “succession”: a two-head pattern from Art. 456 and comparison with b sin-
gle-head and c two-head patterns from Art. 737
of the ICC (i.e., relevant to key concepts in inheritance law), which are next reported
both in Italian and English-translated versions.
The attention-head view in bertviz visualizes attention patterns as lines
connecting the word being updated (left) with the word(s) being attended to
(right), for any given input sequence, where color intensity reflects the attention
weight. Figure 2a–c shows noteworthy examples focused on the word “succes-
sion”, from the following sentences:
from Art. 456: “la successione si apre al momento della morte nel luogo
dell’ultimo domicilio del defunto” (i.e., “the succession opens at the
moment of death in the place of the last domicile of the deceased person”)
from Art. 737: “i figli e i loro discendenti ed il coniuge che concorrono
alla successione devono conferire ai coeredi tutto ciò che hanno ricevuto
dal defunto per donazione” (i.e., the children and their descendants and the
spouse who contribute to the succession must give to the co-heirs every-
thing they have received from the deceased person as a donation)
In Fig. 2a, we observe how the source is connected to a meaningful, non-contigu-
ous set of words, particularly, “apre” (“opens”), “morte” (“death”), and “defunto”
(“deceased person”). In addition, in Fig. 2b, we observe how “successione” is
related to “coniuge” (“spouse”), “donazione” (“donation”), which is further
enriched in the two-head attention patterns with “coeredi” (“co-heirs”), “con-
ferire” (“give”), and “concorrono” (“contribute”), shown in Fig. 2c; moreover,
“successione” is still connected to “defunto”. Remarkably, these patterns high-
light the model’s ability not only to mine semantically meaningful patterns that
1 3
434 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
are more complex than next-word or delimiter-focused patterns, but also to build
patterns that consistently hold across various sentences sharing words. Note that,
as shown in our examples, these sentences can belong to different contexts (i.e.,
different articles), and can significantly vary in length. The latter point is particu-
larly evident, for instance, in the following example sentences:
from Art. 457: “l’eredità si devolve per legge o per testamento. Non si fa luogo
alla successione legittima se non quando manca, in tutto o in parte, quella
testamentaria” (i.e., “the inheritance is devolved by law or by will. There is
no place for legitimate succession except when the testamentary succession is
missing, in whole or in part”)
from Art. 683: “la revocazione fatta con un testamento posteriore conserva
la sua efficacia anche quando questo rimane senza effetto perché l’erede isti-
tuito o il legatario è premorto al testatore, o è incapace o indegno, ovvero
ha rinunziato all’eredità o al legato” (i.e., “ the revocation made with a later
will retains its effectiveness even when this remains without effect because
the established heir or legatee is premortal to the testator, or is incapable or
unworthy, or has renounced the inheritance or the legacy”)
Focusing now on “eredità” (“inheritance”), in Art. 457 we found attention pat-
terns with “testamento” (“testament”), “legittima” (“legitimate”), “testamentaria”
(“testamentary succession”), whereas in the long sentence from Art. 683, we again
found a link to “testamento” (“testament”) as well as with the related concept “testa-
tore” (“testator”), in addition to connections with “premorto” (“premortal”), “inde-
gno” (“unworthy”), and “rinunziato” (“renounced”).
We point out that our investigation of LamBERTa models’ attention patterns was
found to be persistent over different input sequences, besides the above discussed
examples. This has unveiled the ability of LamBERTa models to form different
types of patterns, which include complex bag-of-words and next-word patterns.
6 Visualization of ICC LamBERTa Embeddings
Our qualitative evaluation of LamBERTa models is also concerned with the core
outcome of the models, that is, the learned representation embeddings for the input-
ted text.
As previously mentioned in Sect. 4.6, for any given text in input, a real-valued
vector C of length 768 is produced downstream of the 12 layers of a BERT model, in
E
correspondence with the input embedding [CLS] relating to the special token CLS.
This output embedding C can be seen as an encoded representation of the input text
supplied to the model.
In the following, we present a visual exploratory analysis of LamBERTa embed-
dings based on a powerful, widely-recognized method for the visualization of high-
dimensional data, namely t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE)
(van der Maaten and Hinton 2008). t-SNE is a non-linear technique for dimension-
ality reduction that is highly effective at providing an intuition of how the data is
arranged in a high-dimensional space. The t-SNE algorithm calculates a similarity
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 435
Fig. 3 Visualization of the ICC article embeddings produced by LamBERTa local models, transformed
onto a 3D t-SNE space. Color codes correspond to ICC books: blue for Book-1, red for Book-2, green for
Book-3, purple for Book-4, orange for Book-5, cyan for Book-6
measure between pairs of instances in the high-dimensional space and in the low-
dimensional space, usually 2D or 3D. Then, it converts the pairwise similarities to
joint probabilities and tries to minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence between
the joint probabilities of the low-dimensional embedding and the high-dimensional
data.
It is well-known that t-SNE outputs provide better and more interpretable results
than Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and other linear dimensionality reduction
models, which are not effective at interpreting complex polynomial relationships
between features. In particular, by seeking to maximize variance and preserving
large pairwise distances, the classic PCA focuses on placing dissimilar data points
far apart in a lower dimension representation; however, in order to represent high-
dimensional data on low-dimensional, non-linear manifold, it is important that simi-
lar data points must be represented close together. This is ensured by t-SNE, which
preserves small pairwise distances or local similarities (i.e., nearest-neighbors), so
that similar points on the manifold are mapped to similar points in the low-dimen-
sional representation.
Figure 3 displays 3D t-SNE representations of the article embeddings generated
by LamBERTa local models, for each book of the ICC. (Each point represents the
1 3
436 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
Fig. 4 Visualization of the ICC article embeddings produced by LamBERTa global model, transformed
onto a 3D t-SNE space. Color coding is the same as in Fig. 3
t-SNE transformation of the embedding of an article onto a 3D space, while colors
are used to distinguish the various books.) In the figure, we show progressive com-
binations of the results from different books,9 while the last chart corresponds to
the whole ICC. This choice of presentation is motivated to ease the readability of
each book’s article embeddings. It can be noted that the LamBERTa local mod-
els are able to generate embeddings so that t-SNE can effectively put nearest-neigh-
bor cases together, with a certain tendency of distributing the points from different
books in differest subspaces.
Let us now compare the above results with those from Fig. 4, which shows the 3D
t-SNE representations of the article embeddings generated by LamBERTa global
model.10 From the comparison, we observe a less compact and localized representa-
tion in the global model embeddings w.r.t. the local model ones. This is interesting
yet expected, since global models are designed to go beyond the boundaries of a
9 The order of combination of the books is just due to the sake of presentation.
10 In both local and global settings, t-SNE was carried out until convergence, with the default value of
perplexity, which is a key parameter to control the number of effective nearest neighbors in the manifold
learning. Notably, we tried different values for the perplexity, both within and outside the recommended
range (i.e., 5-50), but the difference in the visual analysis results between the global and local cases still
remained the same.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 437
book, whereas local models focus on the interrelations between articles on the same
book.
It should be noted that while the above remark would hint at preferring the use
of local models against global models, at least in terms of interpretability based on
visual exploratory analysis, we shall deep our understanding on the effectiveness of
the two learning approaches in the next section, which is dedicated to the presenta-
tion and discussion of our extensive, quantitative experimental evaluation of Lam-
BERTa models.
7 Experimental evaluation
In this section we present the methodology and results of an experimental evaluation
that we have thoroughly carried out on LamBERTa models. In the following, we
first state our evaluation goals in Sect. 7.1, then we define the types of test queries
and select the datasets in Sect. 7.2, finally we describe our methodology and assess-
ment criteria in Sect. 7.3.
7.1 Evaluation goals
Our main evaluation goals can be summarized as follows:
• To validate and measure the effectiveness of LamBERTa models for law article
retrieval tasks: how do local and global models perform on different evaluation
contexts, i.e., against queries of different type, different length, and different lexi-
con? (Sect. 8.1)
• To evaluate LamBERTa models in single-label as well as multi-label classifica-
tion tasks: how do they perform w.r.t. different assumptions on the article rel-
evance to a query, particularly depending on whether a query is originally asso-
ciated with or derived from a particular article, or by-definition associated with a
group of articles? (Sect. 8.1)
• To understand how a LamBERTa model’s behavior is affected by varying and
changing its constituents in terms of training-instance labeling schemes and
learning parameters (Sect. 8.2).
• To demonstrate the superiority of our classification-based approach to law arti-
cle retrieval by comparing LamBERTa to other deep-learning-based text clas-
sifiers (Sect. 8.3.1) and to a few-shot learner conceived for an attribute-aware
prediction task that we have newly designed based on the ICC heading metadata
(Sect. 8.3.2).
1 3
438 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
7.2 Query sets
A query set is here meant as a collection of natural language texts that discuss legal
subjects relating to the ICC articles. For evaluation purposes, each query as a test
instance is associated with one or more article-class labels.
It should be emphasized that, on the one hand, we cannot devise a training-test
split or cross-validation of the target ICC corpus (since we want that our Lam-
BERTa models embed the knowledge from all articles therein), and on the other
hand, there is a lack of query evaluation benchmarks for Italian civil law documents.
Therefore, we devise different types of query sets, which are aimed at representing
testbeds at varying difficulty level for evaluating our LamBERTa models:
• QType-1—book-sentence-queries refer to a set of queries that correspond to ran-
domly selected sentences from the articles of a book. Each query is derived from
a single article, and multiple queries are from the same article.
• QType-2—paraphrased-sentence-queries share the same composition of
QType-1 queries but differ from them as the sentences of a book’s articles are
paraphrased. To this purpose, we adopt a simple approach based on backtransla-
tion from English (i.e., an original sentence in Italian is first translated to Eng-
lish, then the obtained English sentence is translated to Italian).11
• QType-3—comment-queries are defined to leverage the publicly available com-
ments on the ICC articles provided by legal experts through the platform “Law
for Everyone”.12 Such comments are delivered to provide annotations about the
interpretation of the meanings and law implications associated to an article, or to
particular terms occurring in an article. Each query corresponds to a comment
available about one article, which is a paragraph comprised of about 5 sentences
on average.
• QType-4—comment-sentence-queries refer to the same source as QType-3, but
the comments are split into sentences, so that each query contains a single sen-
tence of a comment. Therefore, each query will be associated to a single article,
and multiple queries will refer to the same article.
• QType-5—case-queries refer to a collection of case law decisions from the civil
section of the Italian Court of Cassation, which is the highest court in the Italian
judicial system. These case law decisions are selected from publicly available
corpora of the most significant jurisprudential sentences associated with the ICC
articles, spanning over the period 1977-2015.
• QType-6—ICC-heading-queries are defined by extracting the headings of chap-
ters, subchapters, and sections of each ICC book. Such headings are very short,
ranging from one to few keywords used to describe the topic of a particular divi-
sion of a book.
11 We used the Google Translate service, which is a widely-used yet effective machine translator.
12 Law for Everyone online news portal, available at https:// www. laleg geper tutti. it.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 439
1 3
stes
yreuq
tset
eht
no
scitsitats
niaM
3
elbaT
secnetneS#
sdroW#
seireuQ#
epyT
yreuQ
sdroW#
seireuQ#
epyt
yreuQ
noitrop
CCI
2621
383,83
133
3-epyTQ
634,31
097
1-epyTQ
1-kooB
0001
622,03
223
4-epyTQ
899,01
096
2-epyTQ
2-kooB
187
518,32
682
249,11
827
3-kooB
0462
063,58
467
253,72
4771
4-kooB
7142
490,78
075
457,22
6241
5-kooB
0401
898,13
492
399,11
266
6-kooB
egnar
raeY
sdroW#
seireuQ#
epyt
yreuQ
noitrop
CCI
4102–8791
464,93
333
5-epyTQ
1-kooB
4102–9791
658,63
743
2-kooB
4102–9791
346,93
173
3-kooB
5102–8791
432,111
579
4-kooB
5102–7791
782,411
7301
5-kooB
5102–8791
681,18
027
6-kooB
sdrow
latoT#
seireuq
noitceS#
retpahcbuS#
seireuq
retpahC#
epyt
yreuQ
noitrop
CCI
seireuq
713
22
52
41
6-epyTQ
1-kooB
061
41
03
5
2-kooB
032
92
12
9
3-kooB
663
75
15
9
4-kooB
793
15
11
11
5-kooB
152
83
81
5
6-kooB
440 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
7.2.1 Characteristics and differences of the query‑sets
It should be noted that while QType-1 and QType-6 query sets have the same lexicon
as the corresponding book articles, this does not necessarily hold for QType-2 due
to the paraphrasing process, and the difference becomes more evident with QType-
3, QType-4, and QType-5 query sets. Indeed, the latter not only originate from a
corpus different from the ICC, but they have the typical verbosity of annotations or
comments about law articles as well as of case law decisions; moreover, they often
provide cross-book references, therefore, QType-3, QType-4, and QType-5 query-
set contents are not necessarily bounded by a book’s context.
Moreover, QType-3, QType-5, and QType-6 differ from the other types in terms
of length of each query, which corresponds indeed to multiple sentences or a para-
graph, in the case of QType-3 and QType-5, and to a single or few keywords, in the
case of QType-6. Note that, although derived from the ICC books, the contents of
the QType-6 queries were totally discarded when training our LamBERTa models;
moreover, unlike the other types of queries, each QType-6 query is by definition
associated with a group of articles (i.e., according to the book divisions) rather than
a single article, therefore we shall use QType-6 queries for the multi-label evalua-
tion task only. Also, it should be emphasized that the QType-5 queries represent a
different difficult testbed as they contain real-life, heterogeneous fact descriptions of
the case and judicial precedents.
Table 3 summarizes main statistics on the query sets. In addition, note that the
percentage of QType-1 that were paraphrased (i.e., to produce QType-2 queries)
resulted in above 85% for each of the books. Also, the number of sentences in a
book’s query set (last column of the upper subtable) corresponds to the number of
queries of QType-4 for that book.
It is also worth emphasizing that all query sets were validated by legal experts.
This is important to ensure not only generic linguistic requirements but also mean-
ingfulness of the query contents from a legal viewpoint.
7.3 Evaluation methodology and assessment criteria
C
Let us denote with either a portion (i.e., a single book) of the ICC, or the whole
ICC. We specify an evaluation context in terms of a test set (i.e., query set) Q perti-
nent to C and a LamBERTa model M learnt from C . Note that the pertinence of Q
C
w.r.t. is differently determined depending on the type of query set, as previously
discussed in Sect. 7.2.
We consider two multi-class evaluation contexts: single-label and multi-label. In
the single-label context, each query is pertinent to only one article, therefore there is
only one relevant result for each query. In the multi-label context, each query can be
pertinent to more than one article, therefore there can be multiple relevant results for
each query.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 441
7.3.1 Single‑label evaluation context
We consider a confusion matrix in which the article ids correspond to the classes.
Upon this matrix, we measure the following standard statistics for each article
A i ∈C : the precision for A i ( P i ), i.e., the number of times (queries) A i was correctly
predicted out of all predictions of A i , the recall for A i ( R i ), i.e., the number of times
(queries) A i was correctly predicted out of all queries actually pertinent to A i , the
F-measure for A i ( F i ), i.e., F i =2P iR i∕(P i+R i) . Then, we averaged over all articles
to obtain the per-article average precision (P), recall (R), and two types of F-measure:
micro-averaged F-measure ( F𝜇 ) as the actual average over all F i s, and macro-aver-
aged F-measure ( FM ) as the harmonic mean of P and R, i.e., FM =2PR∕(P+R).
In addition, we consider two other types of criteria that respectively account for
the top-k predictions and the position (rank) of the correct article in predictions. The
first aspect is captured in terms of the fraction of correct article labels that are found
in the top-k predictions (i.e., top-k-probability results in response to each query),
and averaging over all queries, which is the recall@k (R@k). The second aspect is
measured as the mean reciprocal rank (MRR) considering for each query the rank of
the correct prediction over the classification probability distribution, and averaging
over all queries.
Moreover, we wanted to understand the uncertainty of prediction of LamBERTa
models when evaluated over each query: to this purpose, we measured the entropy
of the classification probability distributions obtained for each query evaluation, and
averaged over all queries; in particular, we distinguished between the entropy of
each entire distribution (E) from the entropy of the distribution corresponding to the
top-k-probability results (E@k).
7.3.2 Multi‑label evaluation context
The basic requirement for the multi-label evaluation context is that, for each test
query, a set of articles is regarded as relevant to the query. In this respect, we con-
sider two different perspectives, depending on whether a query is (i) originally asso-
ciated with or derived from a particular article, or (ii) by-definition associated with
a group of articles. We will refer to the former scenario as article-driven multi-label
evaluation, and to the second scenario as topic-driven multi-label evaluation.
Article-driven multi-label evaluation. For this stage of evaluation, we require that,
for each test query associated with article A i , a set of articles related to A i is to be
selected as the set of articles relevant to the query, together with A i . We adopt two
approaches to determine the article relatedness, which rely on a supervised and an
unsupervised grouping of the articles, respectively. The supervised approach refers
to the logical organization of the articles of each book originally available in the
ICC (cf. Sect. 3), whereas the unsupervised approach leverages a content-similarity-
based grouping of the articles produced by a document clustering method.
ICC-classification-based. We exploit the ICC-provided classification meta-data
of each book to label each article with the terminal division it belongs to. Since a
division usually contains a few articles, the same label will be associated to multiple
1 3
442 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
articles. It should be noted that the book hierarchies are quite different to each other,
both in terms of maximum branching (e.g., from 5 chapters in Book-2 and Book-6,
to 14 chapters in Book-1) and total number of divisions (e.g., from 51 in Book-2 to
135 in Book-4); moreover, sections, subchapters or even chapters can be leaf nodes
in the corresponding hierarchy, i.e., they contain articles without any further divi-
sion. This leads to the following distribution of number of labels over the various
books: 50 in Book-1, 40 in Book-2, 47 in Book-3, 112 in Book-4, 94 in Book-5, 56
in Book-6.
Clustering-based. As concerns the unsupervised, similarity-based approach, we
compute a clustering of the set of articles of a given book, so that each cluster will
correspond to a group of articles that are similar by content. Each of the produced
clusters will be regarded as the set of relevant articles for each query whose original
label article belongs to that set. Therefore, if a cluster contains n articles, then each
of the queries originally labeled with any of such n articles, will share the same set
of n relevant articles.
To perform the clustering of the article set of a given book, we resort to a widely-
used, well-known document clustering method, which consists in applying a cen-
troid-based partitional clustering algorithm (Jain and Dubes 1988) over a document-
term matrix modeling a vectorial bag-of-words representation of the documents over
the term feature space, using TF-IDF (term-frequency inverse-document-frequency)
as term relevance weighting function (Jones 2004) and cosine similarity for docu-
ment comparison. This method is also known as spherical k-means (Dhillon and
Modha 2001). We used a particularly effective and optimized version of this method,
called bisecting k-means (Zhao and Karypis 2004), which is a standard de-facto of
document clustering tools based on the classic bag-of-words model.13
It should be emphasized that our goal here is to induce an organization of the
articles that is based on content affinity while discarding any information on the ICC
article labeling. In this regard, we have deliberately exploited a representation model
that, despite its known limitations in being unable to capture latent semantic aspects
underlying correlations between words, it is still an effective baseline, yet unbiased
with respect to the deep language model ability of LamBERTa.
Computation of relevant sets. Let us denote with P a partitioning of C that corre-
C
sponds to either the ICC classification of the articles in (i.e., supervised organiza-
C
tion) or a clustering of (i.e., unsupervised organization). For either approach, given
a test query q i ∈Q with article label A, we detect the relevant article set for q as the
partition P∈P that contains A, then we match this set to the set of top-|P| predic-
tions of M to compute precision, recall, and F-measure for q i . Finally, we averaged
over all queries to obtain overall precision, recall, micro-averaged F-measure and
macro-averaged F-measure.
Topic-driven multi-label evaluation. Unlike the previously discussed evaluation
stage, here we consider queries that are expressed by one or few keywords describ-
ing the topic associated with a set of articles.
13 http:// glaros. dtc. umn. edu/ gkhome/ cluto/ cluto/ overv iew.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 443
1 3
-moc
,)elbatbus
reppu
dnoces
,2-epyTQ(
seireuq-ecnetnes-desarhparap
,)elbatbus
reppu
,1-epyTQ(
seireuq-ecnetnes-koob
fo
stes
lla
rof
,sledom
lacol
.sv
labolG
4
elbaT
-icerP
,llaceR
:)elbatbus
mottob
,5-epyTQ(
seireuq-esac
dna
,)elbatbus
mottob
dnoces
,4-epyTQ(
seireuq-ecnetnes-tnemmoc
,)elbatbus
reppu
driht
,3-epyTQ(
seireuq-tnem
RRM
dna
,k@llaceR
,serusaem-F
degareva-orcam
dna
-orcim
,nois
RRM
01@R
3@R
MF
𝜇F
P
R
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
Q
079.0
679.0
799.0
999.0
299.0
989.0
469.0
969.0
559.0
169.0
979.0
579.0
949.0
269.0
1 Q
869.0
389.0
689.0
999.0
189.0
499.0
969.0
779.0
169.0
179.0
589.0
189.0
459.0
279.0
2 Q
789.0
599.0
799.0
000.1
599.0
000.1
689.0
299.0
189.0
099.0
499.0
499.0
879.0
099.0
3 Q
669.0
579.0
689.0
099.0
779.0
489.0
669.0
279.0
859.0
469.0
589.0
389.0
849.0
169.0
4 Q
049.0
749.0
889.0
899.0
479.0
489.0
529.0
729.0
809.0
909.0
749.0
449.0
509.0
019.0
5 Q
479.0
989.0
299.0
000.1
589.0
000.1
379.0
289.0
669.0
879.0
689.0
689.0
169.0
979.0
6 Q
487.0
188.0
188.0
949.0
928.0
509.0
477.0
358.0
547.0
828.0
328.0
668.0
037.0
148.0
1 Q
107.0
178.0
218.0
149.0
247.0
299.0
796.0
148.0
966.0
418.0
667.0
658.0
936.0
828.0
2 Q
877.0
698.0
248.0
249.0
618.0
229.0
187.0
378.0
657.0
158.0
348.0
688.0
827.0
168.0
3 Q
586.0
977.0
387.0
168.0
617.0
608.0
866.0
647.0
936.0
317.0
607.0
657.0
536.0
637.0
4 Q
557.0
097.0
768.0
809.0
808.0
348.0
217.0
837.0
686.0
017.0
247.0
957.0
486.0
817.0
5 Q
657.0
288.0
548.0
149.0
387.0
419.0
657.0
758.0
037.0
338.0
718.0
478.0
407.0
148.0
6 Q
553.0
554.0
035.0
576.0
224.0
494.0
022.0
092.0
112.0
472.0
691.0
842.0
52.0
943.0
1 Q
562.0
544.0
144.0
556.0
703.0
494.0
951.0
352.0
551.0
932.0
541.0
312.0
771.0
313.0
2 Q
173.0
705.0
475.0
407.0
624.0
775.0
632.0
043.0
822.0
523.0
612.0
892.0
062.0
693.0
3 Q
343.0
834.0
225.0
226.0
783.0
784.0
512.0
972.0
602.0
462.0
091.0
932.0
742.0
633.0
4 Q
573.0
203.0
095.0
265.0
334.0
463.0
612.0
741.0
502.0
731.0
091.0
821.0
252.0
171.0
5 Q
043.0
515.0
155.0
547.0
883.0
885.0
302.0
233.0
391.0
713.0
871.0
192.0
532.0
783.0
6
444 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
1 3
)deunitnoc(
4
elbaT
RRM
01@R
3@R
MF
𝜇F
P
R
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
Q
932.0
333.0
673.0
205.0
562.0
363.0
651.0
491.0
531.0
071.0
381.0
791.0
631.0
091.0
1 Q
751.0
513.0
752.0
374.0
271.0
343.0
911.0
302.0
601.0
371.0
841.0
191.0
001.0
612.0
2 Q
052.0
593.0
504.0
965.0
862.0
334.0
961.0
132.0
541.0
402.0
881.0
322.0
351.0
142.0
3 Q
822.0
392.0
543.0
054.0
352.0
423.0
751.0
281.0
731.0
651.0
371.0
671.0
441.0
981.0
4 Q
842.0
222.0
624.0
414.0
872.0
652.0
231.0
801.0
311.0
090.0
841.0
231.0
911.0
290.0
5 Q
012.0
333.0
633.0
805.0
732.0
273.0
171.0
812.0
741.0
291.0
902.0
112.0
441.0
422.0
6 Q
362.0
034.0
884.0
318.0
403.0
494.0
021.0
032.0
101.0
012.0
121.0
332.0
811.0
822.0
1 Q
072.0
564.0
444.0
627.0
082.0
105.0
191.0
303.0
271.0
472.0
232.0
613.0
261.0
292.0
2 Q
682.0
984.0
474.0
658.0
033.0
665.0
302.0
203.0
081.0
372.0
712.0
323.0
091.0
482.0
3 Q
972.0
854.0
394.0
308.0
413.0
825.0
271.0
872.0
051.0
052.0
781.0
992.0
951.0
952.0
4 Q
624.0
465.0
746.0
488.0
484.0
146.0
972.0
673.0
252.0
243.0
703.0
104.0
652.0
453.0
5 Q
743.0
095.0
025.0
588.0
673.0
566.0
372.0
714.0
742.0
273.0
313.0
544.0
142.0
293.0
6
noiretirc
noitaulave
dna
tes-yreuq
hcae
rof
ledom
tseb
eht
ot
dnopserroc
seulav
dloB
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 445
Fig. 5 Global vs. local models, for all sets of book-sentence-queries (a–c) and comment-sentence-queries
(d–f): Mean and standard deviation of the normalized Entropy and of the Entropy@k values of the clas-
sification probability distributions
To this purpose, we again exploit the meta-data of article organization available
in the ICC books, so that the articles belonging to the same division of a book (i.e.,
chapter, subchapter, section) will be regarded as the set of articles relevant to the
query corresponding to the description of that division. Depending on the choice of
the type of a book’s division, i.e., the level of the ICC-classification hierarchy of that
book, a different query set will be produced for the book.
set G oi fv e ton p a -i nt e pst r eq du ie cr tiy o nq si ∈ ofQ M w i tt oh a cr ot mic ple u tl ea b pe rl es c A isi i1 o, n… , r, eA ci an , l lw , e a nm d a Ftc -h m t eh ai ss u s re et ft oo r t qh ie .
Finally, we averaged over all queries to obtain overall precision, recall, micro-aver-
aged F-measure and macro-averaged F-measure. Moreover, we measured the frac-
tion of top-k predictions that are relevant to a query, and averaging over all queries,
i.e., precision@k (P@k).
8 Results
We organize the presentation of results into three parts. Section 8.1 describes
the comparison between global and local models under both the single-label and
multi-label evaluation contexts; note that we will use notations G and L i to refer
to the global model and the local model corresponding to the i-th book, respec-
tively, for any given test query-set. Section 8.2 is devoted to an ablation study of
our models, focusing on the analysis of the various unsupervised data labeling
methods and the effect of the training size on the models’ performance. Finally,
Sect. 8.3 presents results obtained by competing deep-learning methods.
1 3
446 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
8.1 Global vs. local models
8.1.1 Single‑label evaluation
Table 4 and Fig. 5 compare global and local models, for all books of the ICC,
according to the criteria selected for the single-label evaluation context. For
the sake of brevity yet representativeness, here we show results corresponding
+
to the UniRR.T labeling scheme—as we shall discuss in Sect. 8.2, this choice
of training-instance labeling scheme is justified as being in general the best-per-
forming scheme for the query sets; nonetheless, analogous findings were drawn
by using other types of queries and labeling schemes.
Looking at the table, let us first consider the results obtained by the Lam-
BERTa models against QType-1 queries. At a first sight, we observe the outstand-
ing scores achieved by all models; this was obviously expected since QType-1
queries are directly extracted from sentences of the book articles used to train
the models. More interesting is the comparison between the local models and
the global model: for any query-set from the i-th book, the corresponding local
model behaves significantly better than the global model in most cases. It should
be noticed that the slightly better results of the global model in terms of precision
are actually determined by its occasional wrongly predictions of articles from dif-
ferent books in place of articles of Book-i.
The outperformance of local models over the global one is also confirmed in
terms of the entropy results, which are always lower, and hence better, than the glob-
al’s ones. Moreover, while the plots in Fig. 5 are representative for QType-1 and
QType-4 queries, the above result for the comparison between local and global mod-
els in terms of entropy behavior equally holds regardless of the type of query set.
Note that, in Fig. 5a and (d), the values of entropy are normalized within the interval
[0, 1] to get a fair comparison between the local models and global models.14 This
indicates that the predictions made by a local model are generally more certain than
those by the global model.
Turning back to the results reported in Table 4, we observe that high performance
scores are still obtained for the paraphrased-sentence-based queries, which indicates
a remarkable robustness of LamBERTa models w.r.t. lexical variants of queries.
Considering now the comment-based queries, both in the paragraph-size (i.e.,
QType-3) and sentence-size versions (i.e., QType-4), we observe a much lower
performance of the models. This is nonetheless not surprising since QType-3 and
QType-4 queries are lexically and linguistically different from the ICC contents (cf.
Sect. 7.2). Besides that, local models show to be consistently better than the global
ones, despite the cross-corpora learning ability of the global model which, in prin-
ciple, could be beneficial for queries that may contain references to articles of dif-
ferent books. One exception corresponds to Book-5: as confirmed by a qualitative
14 For each book, the entropy value of the local model is divided by the base-2 logarithm of the number
of articles of that book, whereas the entropy value of the global model is always divided by the base-2
logarithm of the total number of articles in the ICC.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 447
Table 5 Article-driven, Clustering-based multi-label evaluation: global vs. local models, with labe-
+
ling scheme UniRR.T , for all sets of book-sentence-queries (QType-1), paraphrased-sentence-que-
ries (QType-2), comment-queries (QType-3), comment-sentence-queries (QType-4), and case-queries
(QType-5). (Bold values correspond to the best model for each query-set and evaluation criterion)
Query-set R P F𝜇 FM
i L G L G L G L G
i i i i
Q
QType-1 1 0.615 0.592 0.617 0.591 0.615 0.591 0.616 0.591
Q
2 0.674 0.636 0.684 0.640 0.676 0.637 0.679 0.638
Q
3 0.623 0.604 0.626 0.603 0.624 0.603 0.625 0.603
Q
4 0.331 0.313 0.326 0.312 0.324 0.312 0.328 0.312
Q
5 0.631 0.632 0.633 0.634 0.628 0.631 0.632 0.633
Q
6 0.711 0.675 0.720 0.677 0.710 0.675 0.715 0.676
Q
QType-2 1 0.557 0.473 0.559 0.474 0.557 0.472 0.558 0.473
Q
2 0.595 0.442 0.604 0.445 0.598 0.443 0.599 0.444
Q
3 0.563 0.477 0.566 0.479 0.563 0.477 0.564 0.478
Q
4 0.172 0.236 0.213 0.237 0.186 0.236 0.190 0.237
Q
5 0.522 0.498 0.526 0.499 0.522 0.497 0.524 0.498
Q
6 0.624 0.511 0.628 0.512 0.625 0.511 0.626 0.513
Q
QType-3 1 0.312 0.241 0.315 0.242 0.312 0.241 0.313 0.242
Q
2 0.296 0.164 0.300 0.165 0.297 0.164 0.298 0.164
Q
3 0.332 0.226 0.337 0.228 0.333 0.226 0.334 0.227
Q
4 0.234 0.174 0.241 0.175 0.236 0.174 0.237 0.174
Q
5 0.209 0.249 0.214 0.252 0.209 0.250 0.211 0.251
Q
6 0.361 0.234 0.365 0.236 0.361 0.234 0.363 0.235
Q
QType-4 1 0.227 0.154 0.227 0.155 0.226 0.154 0.227 0.154
Q
2 0.205 0.098 0.207 0.103 0.205 0.096 0.206 0.100
Q
3 0.259 0.153 0.261 0.154 0.258 0.153 0.260 0.153
Q
4 0.163 0.123 0.164 0.127 0.164 0.123 0.163 0.125
Q
5 0.151 0.172 0.152 0.179 0.150 0.174 0.151 0.175
Q
6 0.236 0.147 0.238 0.149 0.235 0.147 0.237 0.148
Q
QType-5 1 0.283 0.179 0.289 0.183 0.284 0.180 0.286 0.181
Q
2 0.294 0.170 0.304 0.175 0.298 0.172 0.299 0.173
Q
3 0.298 0.171 0.302 0.174 0.299 0.171 0.300 0.172
Q
4 0.274 0.192 0.276 0.193 0.275 0.191 0.275 0.192
Q
5 0.378 0.296 0.382 0.298 0.378 0.295 0.380 0.297
Q
6 0.404 0.226 0.408 0.229 0.405 0.226 0.406 0.227
inspection of the legal experts who assisted us, this is due to an accentuation in the
queries for Book-5 of a tendency in more broadly covering subjects of articles from
other books. This is also supported by quantitative statistics about the uniqueness
of the terms in the vocabulary of a book: in fact, we found out that the percentage
of a book’s vocabulary terms that are unique is minimum w.r.t. Book-5; in detail,
39% of Book-1 and Book-2, 48% of Book-3, 43% of Book-4, and 36% of Book-6. A
1 3
448 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
Table 6 Article-driven, ICC-classification-based multi-label evaluation: global vs. local models, with
+
labeling scheme UniRR.T , for all sets of book-sentence-queries (QType-1), paraphrased-sentence-
queries (QType-2), comment-queries (QType-3), comment-sentence-queries (QType-4), and case-queries
(QType-5)
Query-set R P F𝜇 FM
i L G L G L G L G
i i i i
Q
QType-1 1 0.247 0.220 0.312 0.269 0.268 0.236 0.276 0.242
Q
2 0.198 0.187 0.256 0.237 0.216 0.203 0.223 0.209
Q
3 0.217 0.192 0.287 0.250 0.238 0.209 0.247 0.217
Q
4 0.191 0.179 0.234 0.217 0.205 0.191 0.210 0.196
Q
5 0.201 0.191 0.253 0.240 0.218 0.207 0.224 0.213
Q
6 0.268 0.243 0.306 0.283 0.279 0.254 0.286 0.262
Q
QType-2 1 0.244 0.194 0.310 0.239 0.265 0.209 0.273 0.214
Q
2 0.215 0.160 0.278 0.200 0.235 0.173 0.246 0.178
Q
3 0.206 0.164 0.280 0.224 0.229 0.182 0.238 0.189
Q
4 0.172 0.144 0.213 0.178 0.186 0.156 0.190 0.159
Q
5 0.186 0.168 0.235 0.213 0.202 0.183 0.208 0.188
Q
6 0.257 0.212 0.297 0.248 0.268 0.222 0.276 0.228
Q
QType-3 1 0.245 0.167 0.319 0.215 0.269 0.183 0.277 0.188
Q
2 0.170 0.096 0.239 0.134 0.192 0.108 0.199 0.112
Q
3 0.189 0.133 0.265 0.186 0.212 0.149 0.220 0.155
Q
4 0.169 0.126 0.215 0.161 0.184 0.138 0.189 0.141
Q
5 0.154 0.146 0.204 0.200 0.169 0.165 0.176 0.169
Q
6 0.240 0.167 0.285 0.211 0.252 0.178 0.261 0.186
Q
QType-4 1 0.188 0.122 0.241 0.153 0.205 0.132 0.211 0.136
Q
2 0.123 0.065 0.174 0.090 0.139 0.073 0.144 0.076
Q
3 0.156 0.094 0.230 0.133 0.176 0.105 0.184 0.110
Q
4 0.126 0.094 0.164 0.122 0.139 0.103 0.142 0.106
Q
5 0.118 0.115 0.188 0.176 0.140 0.134 0.145 0.139
Q
6 0.173 0.116 0.204 0.143 0.182 0.123 0.187 0.129
Q
QType-5 1 0.309 0.199 0.381 0.237 0.334 0.212 0.341 0.216
Q
2 0.193 0.110 0.265 0.151 0.215 0.122 0.223 0.127
Q
3 0.244 0.167 0.274 0.179 0.255 0.172 0.258 0.173
Q
4 0.233 0.158 0.296 0.199 0.254 0.172 0.261 0.176
Q
5 0.214 0.174 0.272 0.224 0.234 0.191 0.240 0.196
Q
6 0.245 0.159 0.276 0.185 0.253 0.165 0.259 0.171
Bold values correspond to the best model for each query-set and evaluation criterion
further interesting remark can be drawn from the comparison of the QType-3 scores
with the QType-4 scores, as these appear to be generally higher for the former que-
ries, which provide more topical context than sentence-size queries. This would
hence suggest that relatively long queries can be handled by LamBERTa models
effectively.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 449
Notably, the above finding on the ability of handling long, contextualized que-
ries is also confirmed by inspectioning the results obtained against the queries
stating case law decisions (i.e., QType-5 queries). Indeed, despite the particular
difficulty of such a testbed, LamBERTa models show performance scores that are
generally comparable to those obtained for the QType-3 comment queries; more-
over, once again, local models behave better than the corresponding global ones,
according to all assessment criteria (and even without exceptions as opposed to
QType-3 comment queries).
8.1.2 Multi‑label evaluation
Our investigation on the effectiveness of global and local models was further
deepened under the different multi-label evaluation contexts we devised.
Article-driven multi-label evaluation. Tables 5 and 6 report results according
to the article-driven clustering-based and ICC-classification-based analyses, respec-
tively. For the clustering-based approach, results correspond to a number of clusters
over the articles of each book that was set so to have mean cluster size close to three.
At a first glance, the superiority of local models stands out, thus confirming the
findings drawn from the single-label evaluation results. Upon a focused inspection,
we observe few exceptions in Table 5 corresponding to results on Book-5 (similarly
as we already found in Table 4) for the QType-1, QType-3, and QType-4, and on
Book-4 for QType-2; however, this does not occur in Table 6. We tend to ascribe
this to the fact that, being driven by a content-similarity-based approach, the cluster-
ing of the articles is clearly conditioned on the higher topic variety observable in
Book-5 or Book-4, which may favor a global model against a local one in better cap-
turing topics that are outside the boundaries of that particular book. By contrast, this
does not hold for the ICC-classification-based grouping of the articles, as it relies
on an externally provided organization of the articles in a particular book that is not
constrained by the topic patterns (e.g., word co-occurrences) that might be distinc-
tive of that book.
Notably, looking at the QType-5 results, the performance scores obtained by local
and global models are generally comparable to or even higher than those respec-
tively obtained on QType-3 (or QType-4) queries, which is particularly evident for
the ICC-classification-based grouping of the articles (Table 6).
As a further point of investigation, we explored whether the article-driven clus-
tering-based multi-label evaluation is sensitive to how the query relevant sets (i.e.,
clusters of articles) were formed, with a focus on the content representation model
of the articles. In particular, we replaced the TF-IDF vectorial representation of the
articles with the article embeddings generated by our LamBERTa models, while
keeping the same clustering methodology and setting as used in our previous analy-
sis. From the comparison results reported in the Appendix, Table 13, it stands out
that using the embeddings generated by LamBERTa models to represent the articles
in the clustering process is always beneficial to the multi-label classification per-
formance of LamBERTa local models, according to all criteria and query sets. As
expected, the improvements are generally more evident for QType-1 and QType-2
query sets, since these queries have lexicons close to the training data. More
1 3
450 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
1 3
-loC
.)stes
yreuq
6-epyTQ
,.e.i(
seireuq-gnidaeh-CCI
fo
stes
lla
rof
, +
T.RRinU
emehcs
gnilebal
htiw
,sledom
lacol
.sv
labolg
:noitaulave
lebal-itlum
nevird-cipoT
7
elbaT
lebal
yreuq
hcae
ot
gnignoleb
selcitra
fo
.on
egareva
eht
,.e.i
,ezis
ssalc
egareva
rof
sdnats
’sc_a‘
nmu
noitceS
retpahcbuS
retpahC
3@P
𝜇F
sc_a
3@P
𝜇F
sc_a
3@P
𝜇F
sc_a
i
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
G
L
i
i
i
i
i
i
Q
655.0
227.0
502.0
843.0
5.7
297.0
578.0
352.0
703.0
4.41
337.0
768.0
152.0
413.0
1.62
1 Q
333.0
005.0
980.0
432.0
8.11
073.0
915.0
541.0
761.0
6.11
008.0
008.0
742.0
652.0
0.96
2 Q
005.0
775.0
912.0
072.0
5.8
983.0
877.0
541.0
581.0
6.71
655.0
766.0
522.0
782.0
3.04
3 Q
135.0
356.0
941.0
812.0
3.8
135.0
376.0
441.0
612.0
1.71
333.0
444.0
380.0
832.0
4.89
4 Q
215.0
855.0
912.0
512.0
9.01
337.0
337.0
732.0
362.0
2.22
727.0
545.0
361.0
471.0
8.46
5 Q
684.0
175.0
842.0
092.0
5.6
764.0
766.0
202.0
913.0
4.12
006.0
000.1
891.0
204.0
2.66
6
noiretirc
noitaulave
dna
tes-yreuq
hcae
rof
ledom
tseb
eht
ot
dnopserroc
seulav
dloB
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 451
interestingly, we also observe that the performance gain by LamBERTa embed-
dings tends to be higher for the largest books, i.e., Book-4 and Book-5, with peaks
of about 300% percentage increase reached with the QType-2 query-set relevant for
Book-4. Nonetheless, apart from these particular cases, discovering clusters over a
set of articles represented by their LamBERTa embeddings does not bring in gen-
eral to outstanding boost of performance against the TF-IDF vectorial representa-
tion: indeed, this can be ascribed to the very small size of the clusters produced, and
hence the TF-IDF vectorial representation can well approximate and match the clus-
ters detected over the LamBERTa embeddings of the articles, especially in smaller
collections of articles (i.e., ICC books).
Topic-driven multi-label evaluation. Let us now focus on the topic-driven multi-
label evaluation results, based on QType-6 queries, which are shown in Table 7
(details on precision and recall values are omitted for the sake of presentation, but
this does not change the remarks being discussed). Three major remarks arise here.
The first one is again about the higher effectiveness of local models against the
global one, for each of the book query-sets, with the usual exception corresponding
to Book-5, which is more evident as the type of division is finer-grain. The second
remark concerns a comparison between the methods’ performance by varying the
types of book division: the chapter, subchapter and section cases are indeed quite
different to each other, which should be noticed through the different values of the
average number of articles “covered” by each query label-class; in general, higher
values correspond to more abstract divisions. Moreover, the roughly monotone vari-
ation of this statistic over all books cannot be coupled with a monotonic variation
of the performances: for instance, the highest F-measure values correspond to the
division at section level in Book-1, whereas they correspond to the chapter level in
Books-2, 3, 4 and 6. Finally, it is worth noticing that the performances significantly
increase when precision@3 scores are considered, often reaching very high values:
this would suggest that, despite the intrinsic complexity of this evaluation task, the
models are able to guarantee a high fraction of top-3 predictions that correspond to
the articles that are relevant for each query.
8.2 Ablation study
8.2.1 Training‑instance labeling schemes
Besides the settings of BERT learning parameters, our LamBERTa models are
expected to work differently depending on the choice of training-instance labeling
scheme (cf. Sect. 4.5). Understanding how this aspect relates to the performance is
fundamental, as it impacts on the complexity of the induced model. In this respect,
we compared our defined labeling schemes, using the induced local models of
Book-2 (i.e., L 2 ) as case in point.
Table 8 shows single-label evaluation results for all types of query-sets. As
expected, we observe that the scheme based on an article’s title only is largely the
worst-performing method (with the exception of QType-2 where, due to the little
1 3
452 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
Table 8 Evaluation of different local models L 2 for all types of query-sets pertinent to articles of Book-2.
(Bold values correspond to the best model for each query-set and evaluation criterion)
query-set method R P F𝜇 FM R@10 MRR E E@10
QType-1 T 0.530 0.855 0.623 0.655 0.619 0.564 3.023 1.335
UniRR 0.675 0.928 0.755 0.782 0.851 0.744 0.343 0.167
BiRR 0.552 0.775 0.621 0.645 0.745 0.635 0.790 0.342
TriRR 0.584 0.763 0.637 0.661 0.801 0.674 1.149 0.455
CasRR 0.555 0.901 0.653 0.687 0.712 0.608 1.422 0.808
TglRR 0.900 0.955 0.910 0.927 0.980 0.929 0.459 0.281
+
UniRR.T 0.972 0.981 0.971 0.977 0.999 0.983 0.149 0.089
+
CasRR.T 0.823 0.929 0.843 0.873 0.903 0.853 0.863 0.457
+
TglRR.T 0.919 0.972 0.927 0.945 0.977 0.940 0.492 0.298
QType-2 T 0.410 0.598 0.456 0.487 0.551 0.463 3.892 1.706
UniRR 0.549 0.744 0.605 0.632 0.754 0.624 1.310 0.585
BiRR 0.342 0.470 0.374 0.396 0.581 0.436 2.084 0.899
TriRR 0.442 0.620 0.494 0.516 0.699 0.544 2.253 0.881
CasRR 0.383 0.620 0.444 0.473 0.597 0.455 2.289 1.232
TglRR 0.612 0.722 0.626 0.662 0.823 0.684 2.101 1.107
+
UniRR.T 0.828 0.856 0.814 0.841 0.941 0.871 1.620 0.732
+
CasRR.T 0.625 0.740 0.639 0.677 0.784 0.685 2.221 1.074
+
TglRR.T 0.632 0.729 0.642 0.677 0.854 0.705 2.311 1.174
QType-3 T 0.023 0.008 0.010 0.012 0.171 0.073 6.312 2.816
UniRR 0.296 0.208 0.230 0.244 0.618 0.425 4.368 2.051
BiRR 0.212 0.140 0.156 0.169 0.494 0.321 5.185 2.349
TriRR 0.194 0.113 0.133 0.143 0.478 0.295 5.885 2.523
CasRR 0.110 0.075 0.082 0.089 0.363 0.199 4.034 1.800
TglRR 0.261 0.186 0.203 0.217 0.624 0.394 4.048 1.939
+
UniRR.T 0.313 0.213 0.239 0.253 0.655 0.445 4.938 2.266
+
CasRR.T 0.232 0.157 0.176 0.187 0.525 0.339 4.717 2.172
+
TglRR.T 0.217 0.162 0.173 0.185 0.593 0.347 4.254 2.100
QType-4 T 0.037 0.042 0.028 0.039 0.137 0.076 6.379 2.800
UniRR 0.175 0.199 0.160 0.186 0.439 0.271 4.000 1.834
BiRR 0.104 0.125 0.094 0.114 0.309 0.185 4.592 2.065
TriRR 0.090 0.101 0.077 0.096 0.275 0.163 5.357 2.241
CasRR 0.056 0.068 0.049 0.061 0.219 0.115 3.268 1.615
TglRR 0.154 0.178 0.141 0.165 0.416 0.253 4.174 1.991
+
UniRR.T 0.216 0.191 0.173 0.203 0.473 0.315 5.077 2.311
+
CasRR.T 0.135 0.161 0.119 0.147 0.347 0.211 4.586 2.130
+
TglRR.T 0.144 0.202 0.143 0.168 0.398 0.226 4.148 2.027
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 453
Table 8 (continued)
query-set method R P F𝜇 FM R@10 MRR E E@10
QType-5 T 0.036 0.025 0.022 0.029 0.127 0.081 6.570 2.968
UniRR 0.260 0.288 0.232 0.273 0.666 0.436 4.446 2.074
BiRR 0.232 0.236 0.197 0.234 0.548 0.357 4.873 2.198
TriRR 0.225 0.248 0.204 0.236 0.568 0.380 5.498 2.408
CasRR 0.082 0.089 0.068 0.086 0.334 0.187 5.429 2.400
TglRR 0.278 0.318 0.258 0.297 0.686 0.434 4.560 2.150
+
UniRR.T 0.292 0.316 0.274 0.303 0.726 0.465 4.972 2.299
+
CasRR.T 0.238 0.295 0.233 0.263 0.579 0.380 4.822 2.158
+
TglRR.T 0.283 0.316 0.273 0.299 0.700 0.463 4.638 2.137
Table 9 Single-label evaluation of local model L 2 UniRR.T + with minTU=64 , for each type of query-
set
query-set R P F𝜇 FM R@10 MRR E E@10
QType-1 0.971 0.982 0.971 0.977 0.996 0.982 0.090 0.072
− 0.10% + 0.13% − 0.04% − 0.04% − 0.34% − 0.13% − 39.40% − 19.41%
QType-2 0.797 0.825 0.781 0.811 0.928 0.845 1.266 0.657
− 3.73% − 3.67% − 4.09% − 3.62% − 1.43% − 2.97% − 21.85% − 10.30%
QType-3 0.351 0.254 0.280 0.295 0.666 0.481 3.661 1.814
+ 12.14% + 19.25% + 17.15% + 16.60% + 1.68% + 8.09% − 25.86% − 19.95%
QType-4 0.221 0.204 0.185 0.212 0.482 0.308 3.889 1.928
+ 2.31% + 7.37% + 6.94% + 4.95% + 2.55% − 0.96% − 23.40% − 16.57%
QType-5 0.342 0.352 0.320 0.347 0.740 0.460 3.615 1.872
+ 17.13% + 11.33% + 16.67% + 14.53% + 1.93% − 1.08% − 27.27% − 18.58%
Percentage values correspond to the increase/decrease percentage of performance criteria when using
minTU=64
compared to
minTU=32
. (Highlighted in bold are the values corresponding to a worsening
when using
minTU=64)
impact of paraphrasing on the article titles, it happens that the performance of T
is slightly better than CasRR). More interestingly, lower size of n-gram seems to
be beneficial to the effectiveness of the model, especially on QType-3, QType-4,
and QType-5 queries, indeed UniRR always outperforms both BiRR and TriRR;
also, UniRR behaves better than the cascade scheme (CasRR) as well, and again
the gap is more evident in the comment-based queries. The combination of n-grams
of varying size reflected by the TglRR scheme leads to a significant increase in
the performance over all previously mentioned schemes, for QType-1, QType-2, and
QType-5 queries. This would suggest that more sophisticated labeling schemes can
lead to higher effectiveness in the learned model. Nonetheless, superior performance
1 3
454 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
Table 10 Multi-label evaluation of local model L 2 UniRR.T+ with minTU=64 , for each type of query-
set
Query-set Clustering-based ICC-Classification-based
R P F𝜇 FM R P F𝜇 FM
QType-1 0.658 0.668 0.662 0.663 0.197 0.252 0.215 0.221
− 2.08% − 2.20% − 2.07% − 2.21% − 0.51% − 1.56% − 0.46% − 0.90%
QType-2 0.556 0.565 0.559 0.560 0.198 0.252 0.215 0.222
− 6.55% − 6.46% − 6.52% − 6.51% − 8.04% − 9.34% − 8.45% − 8.61%
QType-3 0.322 0.327 0.324 0.324 0.166 0.228 0.185 0.192
+8.78% +9.00% +9.09% +8.72% − 2.35% − 4.60% − 3.65% − 3.52%
QType-4 0.202 0.206 0.203 0.204 0.131 0.183 0.148 0.153
− 0.98% +0.00% − 0.98% − 0.49% +6.50% +5.17% +6.47% +6.25%
QType-5 0.312 0.327 0.319 0.320 0.181 0.247 0.201 0.209
+6.04% +7.72% +7.12% +7.09% − 6.22% − 6.79% − 6.51% − 6.28%
Percentage values correspond to the increase/decrease percentage of performance criteria when using
minTU=64
compared to
minTU=32
. (Highlighted in bold are the values corresponding to a worsening
when using
minTU=64)
is obtained by considering the schemes with emphasis on the title, which all improve
+
upon the corresponding schemes not emphasizing the title, with UniRR.T being
the best-performing method by far according to all criteria.
It also should be noted that the comment and case law query testbeds confirmed
to be more difficult than the other types of queries. Also, QType-3 and QType-5
results are found to be generally higher than those obtained for QType-4 queries,
which would indicate that, by providing a more informative context, long (i.e., par-
agraph-like) queries are better handled by LamBERTa models w.r.t. their shorter
(i.e., sentence-like) counterparts.
8.2.2 Training units per article
The setting of the number of training units per article (minTU, whose default is 32),
which impacts on the size of the training sets, is another model parameter that in
principle deserves attention. We investigated this aspect according to both single-
label and multi-label evaluation contexts, whose results are reported in Table 9 and
Table 10, respectively, for the local model learned from Book-2; note that, once
again, this is for the sake of presentation, as we found out analogous remarks for
other books.
Our goal was to understand whether and to what extent doubling the minTU value
could lead to improve the model performance. In this respect, considering the sin-
gle-label evaluation case, we observe two different outcomes when setting minTU to
64: the one corresponding to QType-1 and QType-2 queries, which unveils a gen-
eral degradation of the performance, and the other one corresponding to QType-
3, QType-4, QType-5 queries, which conversely shows significant improvements
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 455
according to most criteria. This is remarkable as it would suggest that increasing the
number of replicas in building the books’ training sets is unnecessary, or even detri-
mental, for queries lexically close to the book articles; by contrast, it turns out to be
useful for improving the classifier performance against more difficult query-testbeds
like comment and case queries. Looking at the multi-label evaluation results, we can
draw analogous considerations for the clustering-based evaluation approach (since
results over QType-4 are only slightly decreased), whereas using less training rep-
licas appears to be preferable for the ICC-classification-based evaluation approach.
8.3 Comparative analysis
8.3.1 Text‑based law article prediction
We conducted a comparative analysis of LamBERTa models with state-of-the-art
text classifiers based on deep learning architectures:
• BiLSTM (Liu et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2016), a bidirectional LSTM model as
sequence encoder. LSTM models have been widely used in text classification as
they can capture contextual information while representing the sentence by fixed
size vector. The model exploited in this evaluation utilizes 2 layers of BiLSTM,
with 32 hidden units for each BiLSTM layer.
• TextCNN (Kim 2014), a convolutional-neural-network-based model with mul-
tiple filter widths for text encoding and classification. Every sentence is repre-
sented as a bidimensional tensor of shape (n, d), where n is the sentence length
and d is the dimensionality of the word embedding vectors. The TextCNN model
utilizes three different filter windows of sizes
{3,4,5}
, 100 feature maps for the
windows’ sizes, ReLU activation function and max-pooling.
• TextRCNN (Lai et al. 2015), a bidirectional LSTM with a pooling layer on the
last sequence output. TextRCNN therefore combines the recurrent neural network
and convolutional network to leverage the advantages of the individual models
in capturing the text semantics. The model first exploits a recurrent structure to
learn word representations for every word in the text, thus capturing the contex-
tual information; afterwards, max-pooling is applied to determine which features
are important for the classification task.
• Seq2Seq-A (Du and Huang 2018; Bahdanau et al. 2015), a Seq2Seq model
with attention mechanism. Seq2Seq models have been widely used in machine
translation and document summarization due to their capability to generate new
sequences based on observed text data. For text classification, here the Seq2Seq-
A model utilizes a single layer BiLSTM as encoder with 32 hidden units. This
encoder learns the hidden representation for every word in an input sentence, and
its final state is then used to learn attention scores for each word in the sentence.
After learning the attention weights, the weighted sum of encoder hidden states
(hidden states of words) gives the attention output vector. The latter is then con-
catenated to the hidden representation and passed to a linear layer to produce the
final classification.
1 3
456 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
• Transformer model for text classification, which is adapted from the model origi-
nally proposed for the task of machine translation in Vaswani et al. (2017). The
key aspect in this model is the use of an attention mechanism to deal with long
range dependencies, but without resorting to RNN models. The encoder part of
the original Transformer model is used for classification. This encoder is com-
posed of 6 layers, each having two sub-layers, namely a multi-head attention
layer, and a 2-layer feed-forward network. Compared to BERT, residual connec-
tion, layer normalization, and masking are discarded.
Evaluation requirements. We designed this comparative evaluation to ful-
fill three main requirements: (i) significance of the selected competing methods,
(ii) robustness of their evaluation, and (iii) relatively fair comparison among the
competing methods and our LamBERTa models.
To meet the first requirement, we focused on deep neural network models that
have been widely used for text classification and are often referred to as “predeces-
sors” of deep pre-trained language models like BERT.
To ensure a robust evaluation, we carried out an extensive parameter-tuning phase
of each competing methods, by varying all main parameters within recommended or
reasonable range values, which include: dropout probability (within [0.1,0.4]), max-
imum sentence length (fixed to 60, or flexible), batch size (base-2 powers from 16 to
128), number of epochs (from 10 to 100). The results we will present here refer to
the best performances achieved by each of the models.
We considered main aspects that are shared between our models and the compet-
ing ones to achieve a fair comparison. First, as each of the competing models, except
the Transformer, needs word vector initialization, they were provided with Italian
Wikipedia pre-trained Glove embeddings—recall that Italian Wikipedia is a major
constituent of the pre-trained Italian BERT used for our LamBERTa models. Each
model was then fine-tuned over the individual ICC books following the same data
labeling schemes used for the LamBERTa models. Moreover, since we have to train
a classification problem with as many classes as the number of articles for a given
ICC book, all the models use an appropriate yet identical setting as in LamBERTa
for the optimizer (i.e., Adam) and the loss function (i.e., cross entropy).
Experimental results. The goal of this evaluation stage was to demonstrate the
superiority of LamBERTa against the selected competitors for case law retrieval as
classification task, using different types of test queries. For each competitor, we used
+
the individual books’ UniRR.T labeled data for training. We carried out several
runs by varying the main parameters as previously discussed, and eventually, we
selected the best-performing results for each competitor and query-set, which are
shown in Table 11.
Looking at the table, there are a few remarks that stand out about the competi-
tors. First, the Transformer model consistently excels over the other competitors in
QType-1 and QType-2 query sets; this hints at a better effectiveness of the Trans-
former approach against queries that have some lexical affinity with the training text
data. By contrast, when this does not hold as for comment (i.e., QType-4) and case
law (i.e., QType-5) queries, TextCNN and TextRCNN tend to perform better than the
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 457
1 3
seireuq-ecnetnes-koob
fo
stes
lla
revo
detset
dna
,emehcs
gnilebal
+ T.RRinU
eht
htiw
detatonna
skoob
CCI
laudividni
eht
htiw
deniart
sledom
gnitepmoC
11
elbaT
seireuq-esac
dna
,)elbatbus
reppu
driht
,4-epyTQ(
seireuq-ecnetnes-tnemmoc
,)elbatbus
reppu
dnoces
,2-epyTQ(
seireuq-ecnetnes-desarhparap
,)elbatbus
reppu
,1-epyTQ(
a
yb
deniatbo
ecnamrofrep
tseb
eht
ot
dnopserroc
seulav
dloB(
.erusaem-F
degareva-orcim
dna
,llacer
,noisicerp
fo
seulav
gnimrofrep-tseb
:)elbatbus
mottob
,5-epyTQ(
nosirapmoc
eht
esae
ot
4
elbaT
morf
detroper
osla
era
,cilati
ni
dettamrof
,seulav
ecnamrofrep
aTREBmaL
;noiretirc
noitaulave
dna
tes-yreuq
hcae
rof
,dohtem
gnitepmoc
)sdohtem
gnitepmoc
eht
htiw
remrofsnarT
A-qeS2qeS
NNCRtxeT
MTSLiB
NNCtxeT
aTREBmaL
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
i
849.0
059.0
959.0
465.0
926.0
026.0
538.0
838.0
498.0
086.0
217.0
257.0
019.0
119.0
249.0
169.0
269.0
579.0
1Q
459.0
559.0
569.0
585.0
076.0
036.0
548.0
258.0
498.0
186.0
037.0
537.0
639.0
049.0
959.0
179.0
279.0
189.0
2Q
569.0
569.0
079.0
375.0
146.0
136.0
168.0
568.0
509.0
476.0
427.0
727.0
159.0
159.0
269.0
099.0
099.0
499.0
3Q
159.0
749.0
969.0
566.0
307.0
727.0
278.0
578.0
919.0
637.0
277.0
987.0
839.0
339.0
179.0
469.0
169.0
389.0
4Q
309.0
309.0
639.0
206.0
646.0
966.0
057.0
367.0
718.0
626.0
076.0
986.0
848.0
758.0
598.0
909.0
019.0
449.0
5Q
659.0
759.0
559.0
586.0
817.0
757.0
858.0
668.0
309.0
776.0
327.0
547.0
539.0
839.0
949.0
879.0
979.0
689.0
6Q
457.0
477.0
108.0
423.0
183.0
543.0
916.0
646.0
476.0
943.0
214.0
063.0
057.0
967.0
008.0
828.0
148.0
668.0
1Q
267.0
787.0
318.0
723.0
483.0
353.0
106.0
346.0
646.0
283.0
244.0
904.0
607.0
627.0
067.0
418.0
828.0
658.0
2Q
597.0
408.0
258.0
243.0
904.0
163.0
846.0
276.0
707.0
534.0
394.0
464.0
857.0
567.0
718.0
158.0
168.0
688.0
3Q
476.0
156.0
337.0
852.0
792.0
872.0
285.0
706.0
346.0
292.0
033.0
013.0
966.0
346.0
927.0
317.0
637.0
657.0
4Q
796.0
517.0
437.0
543.0
393.0
773.0
085.0
016.0
736.0
353.0
993.0
183.0
946.0
666.0
417.0
017.0
817.0
957.0
5Q
247.0
657.0
597.0
463.0
834.0
873.0
306.0
526.0
266.0
504.0
154.0
154.0
527.0
737.0
887.0
338.0
148.0
478.0
6Q
980.0
001.0
411.0
810.0
910.0
430.0
021.0
741.0
641.0
310.0
810.0
310.0
421.0
251.0
851.0
071.0
091.0
791.0
1Q
290.0
390.0
121.0
210.0
430.0
110.0
331.0
761.0
661.0
900.0
730.0
510.0
631.0
551.0
071.0
371.0
612.0
191.0
2Q
201.0
211.0
811.0
910.0
920.0
910.0
671.0
402.0
502.0
700.0
120.0
600.0
371.0
802.0
102.0
402.0
142.0
322.0
3Q
160.0
170.0
370.0
400.0
610.0
600.0
441.0
371.0
471.0
500.0
700.0
600.0
621.0
941.0
951.0
651.0
981.0
671.0
4Q
070.0
570.0
980.0
600.0
780.0
400.0
580.0
290.0
401.0
800.0
710.0
310.0
090.0
080.0
901.0
090.0
290.0
231.0
5Q
090.0
301.0
021.0
020.0
560.0
710.0
751.0
581.0
681.0
410.0
420.0
410.0
551.0
661.0
381.0
291.0
422.0
112.0
6Q
458 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
1 3
)deunitnoc(
11
elbaT
remrofsnarT
A-qeS2qeS
NNCRtxeT
MTSLiB
NNCtxeT
aTREBmaL
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
𝜇F
R
P
i
680.0
980.0
201.0
200.0
500.0
100.0
321.0
441.0
551.0
800.0
900.0
900.0
321.0
731.0
741.0
012.0
822.0
332.0
1Q
401.0
290.0
811.0
610.0
210.0
320.0
341.0
961.0
271.0
900.0
320.0
900.0
231.0
361.0
681.0
472.0
292.0
613.0
2Q
421.0
511.0
391.0
210.0
910.0
010.0
151.0
371.0
871.0
800.0
310.0
600.0
912.0
762.0
122.0
372.0
482.0
323.0
3Q
790.0
880.0
601.0
110.0
110.0
120.0
590.0
211.0
511.0
400.0
900.0
700.0
071.0
781.0
612.0
052.0
952.0
992.0
4Q
251.0
441.0
681.0
600.0
020.0
500.0
622.0
232.0
882.0
900.0
610.0
610.0
222.0
152.0
172.0
243.0
453.0
104.0
5Q
731.0
031.0
102.0
610.0
920.0
220.0
952.0
303.0
103.0
330.0
050.0
540.0
492.0
223.0
753.0
273.0
293.0
544.0
6Q
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 459
Fig. 6 Attribute-aware article prediction: Example book hierarchical organization (on the left) and
excerpt of its corresponding attribute-aware article representation (on the right)
others. In fact, for such types of queries, the lack of masked language modeling in
Transformer seems not to be compensated by the attention mechanism as it hap-
pens for the QType-1 and QType-2 queries. Moreover, the RNN models achieve
lower scores than CNN-based or more advanced models, on all query sets. This
indicates that the ability of BiLSTM and Seq2Seq-A of handling more distant token
information (i.e., long range semantic dependency) and achieving complete abstrac-
tion at their bottom layers (without requiring multiple layer stacking like for CNNs)
appear to vanish without a deep pre-training. In addition, CNN models are effec-
tive in extracting local and position-invariant features, and it has indeed been shown
(e.g., Yin et al. 2017) that CNNs can successfully learn to classify a sentence (like
QType-4 comment queries) or a paragraph (like QType-5 case law queries).
Our major finding is that, when comparing to the results obtained by LamBERTa
models (cf. first column of Table 11), the best among the above competing methods
turn out to be outperformed by the corresponding LamBERTa models, on all types
of query. This confirms our initial expectation on the superiority of LamBERTa in
learning classification models from few labeled examples per-class under a tough
multi-class classification scenario, having a very large (i.e., in the order of hundreds)
number of classes.
8.3.2 Attribute‑aware law article prediction
As discussed in Sect. 2, the method in Hu et al. (2018) was conceived for attribute-
aware charge prediction, and was evaluated on collected criminal cases using two
types of text data: the fact of each case and the charges extracted from the penalty
results of each case. Moreover, a number of attributes were defined as to distinguish
the confusing charge pairs previously selected from the confusion matrix obtained
by a charge prediction model.
1 3
460 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
Table 12 Attribute-aware article LamBERTa A-FewShotAP (Hu et al.
prediction: The A-FewShotAP
2018)
model (Hu et al. 2018)
trained with each ICC book i P R FM P R FM
annotated with the UniRR.
T+ labeling scheme, and tested Q 1 0.866 0.841 0.853 0.355 0.410 0.381
over all sets of paraphrased- Q 2 0.856 0.828 0.841 0.328 0.378 0.351
s ue pn pt ee rn sc ue b-q tau be lr eie ),s c( oQ mT myp ee n- t2 -, Q 3 0.886 0.861 0.873 0.450 0.514 0.480
sentence-queries (QType-4, Q 4 0.756 0.736 0.746 0.319 0.384 0.348
second upper subtable), and Q 5 0.759 0.718 0.738 0.382 0.444 0.411
case-queries (QType-5, bottom Q 6 0.874 0.841 0.857 0.412 0.474 0.441
subtable). The table shows best-
performing values of precision, Q 1 0.197 0.190 0.194 0.018 0.031 0.023
recall, and macro-averaged Q 2 0.191 0.216 0.203 0.023 0.043 0.030
F-measure. (LamBERTa Q 3 0.223 0.241 0.231 0.027 0.038 0.032
p ine r if tao lr im c,a an rc ee a v lsa olu re es p, of ro tr em d a ft rt oe md Q 4 0.176 0.189 0.182 0.029 0.047 0.036
Table 4 to ease the comparison Q 5 0.132 0.092 0.108 0.035 0.042 0.038
with the competing method) Q 6 0.211 0.224 0.218 0.031 0.037 0.034
Q 1 0.233 0.228 0.230 0.006 0.013 0.009
Q 2 0.316 0.292 0.303 0.016 0.021 0.018
Q 3 0.323 0.284 0.302 0.016 0.018 0.017
Q 4 0.299 0.259 0.278 0.007 0.010 0.008
Q 5 0.401 0.354 0.376 0.018 0.027 0.022
Q 6 0.445 0.392 0.417 0.025 0.037 0.030
To apply the above method to the ICC law article prediction task, we define an
attribute-aware representation of the ICC article data by exploiting the available
ICC hierarchical labeling of the articles of each book (cf. Sect. 3). Our objective is
to leverage the ICC-classification based attributes as explicit knowledge about how
to distinguish related groups of articles within the same book.
To this purpose, we adopt the following methodology. From the tree modeling
the hierarchical organization into chapters, subchapters, sections and paragraphs
of any given book, we treat each node as a boolean attribute and a complete path
(from the chapter level to a leaf node) as an attribute-set assignment for each of
the articles under that subtree path. We illustrate our defined procedure in Fig. 6,
where for the sake of simplicity, the example shows a hypothetical book contain-
ing 228 articles and organized into four chapters (i.e., C 1,…,C 4 ), seven subchap-
ters (i.e., SC 1,…,SC 7 ), five sections (i.e., S 1,…,S 5 ), and two paragraphs (i.e.,
P 1,P 2 ). Thus, eighteen attributes are defined in total, and each article in the book
is associated with a binary vector (i.e., 1 means that an attribute is representative
for the article, 0 otherwise); note also that the bunch of articles within the same
hierarchical level subdivision share the attribute representation.
The ICC-heading attributes resulting from the application of the above proce-
dure on each of the ICC books are reported in Appendix, Tables 14, 15, 16, 17,
18 and 19.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 461
Experimental settings and results. We resorted to the software implementa-
tion of the method in Hu et al. (2018) provided by the authors15 and made minimal
adaptations to the code so to enable the method to work with our ICC data. We
hereinafter refer to this method as attribute-aware few-shot article prediction model,
A-FewShotAP.
Analogously to the previous stage of comparative evaluation, we conducted an
extensive parameter-tuning phase of A-FewShotAP, by considering both default val-
ues and variations for the main parameters, such as number of layers, learning rate,
number of epochs, batch size. Moreover, like for the other competitors, we used Ital-
ian Wikipedia pre-trained embeddings.
Table 12 summarizes the best-performing results obtained by A-FewShotAP over
different types of query sets, namely paraphrased-sentence-queries, comment-sen-
tence-queries, and case-queries.
As it can be observed, A-FewShotAP performance scores reveal to be never com-
parable to those produced by our LamBERTa models. Indeed, despite no informa-
tion on article attributes is exploited in LamBERTa models, the latter achieve a
large effectiveness gain over A-FewShotAP, regardless of the type of query.
Nonetheless, it is also worth noticing the beneficial effect of the attribute-aware
article prediction when comparing A-FewShotAP with other RNN-based compet-
ing methods, particularly BiLSTM and Seq2Seq-A. Notably, although A-FewShotAP
builds on a conventional LSTM—unlike BiLSTM and Seq2Seq-A, which utilize a
bidirectional LSTM—it can achieve comparable or even higher performance than
the other two methods (cf. Table 11): in fact, on QType-4 queries, A-FewShotAP
behaves better than BiLSTM and (especially in terms of precision) than Seq2Seq-
A, while it performs better than Seq2Seq-A and is generally as good as BiLSTM on
QType-2 and QType-5 queries.
9 Conclusions
We presented LamBERTa, a novel BERT-based language understanding framework
for law article retrieval as a prediction task. One key aspect of LamBERTa is that
it is designed to deal with a challenging learning scenario, where the multi-class
classification setting is characterized by hundreds of classes and very few, per-class
training instances that are generated in an unsupervised fashion.
The purpose of our research is to show that a deep-learning-based civil-law arti-
cle retrieval method can be helpful not only to legal experts to reduce their work-
load, but also to citizens who can benefit from such a system to save their search and
consultation needs. Note also that, while focusing on the Italian Civil Code in its
current version, the LamBERTa architecture can easily be generalized to learn from
other law code systems.
We are currently working on an important extension of LamBERTa to enhance
its capability of understanding patterns between different parts from a collection of
15 https:// github. com/ thunlp/ attri bute_ charge
1 3
462 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
law corpora (as it’s the case of the books within the ICC), but also to enable Lam-
BERTa to learn from external, heterogeneous legal sources, particularly to embed
comments on the code and judicial decisions, also for entailment tasks. We believe
this next step will contribute to the development of powerful tools that can model
both sides of the same coin in predictive justice, so to deliver unprecedented solu-
tions to different problems in artificial intelligence for law.
The ICC corpus and evaluation data are made available to the research commu-
nity at https:// people. dimes. unical. it/ andre ataga relli/ ai4law/.
Appendix
Table 13 compares article-driven multi-label performance results based on clusters
of articles modeled either through TF-IDF vectors or LamBERTa embeddings.
Note that, to ease the comparison, the results under the ‘TF-IDF vectors’ columns
correspond to the performance of local models reported in Table 5.
Tables 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 list the ICC-heading attributes, for each of the
ICC books, which were used in the task of attribute-aware law prediction.
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 463
1 3
sretsulc
no
desab
, +
T.RRinU
emehcs
gnilebal
htiw
,sledom
lacol
yb
deniatbo
stluser
fo
nosirapmoc
:noitaulave
lebal-itlum
desab-gniretsulC
,nevird-elcitrA
31
elbaT
seireuq-ecnetnes-desarhparap
,)1-epyTQ(
seireuq-ecnetnes-koob
fo
stes
lla
rof
,selcitra
CCI
eht
fo
sgniddebme
aTREBmaL
revo
sretsulc
.sv
noitatneserper
FDI-FT
revo
tes-yreuq
hcae
rof
ledom
tseb
eht
ot
dnopserroc
seulav
dloB(
.)5-epyTQ(
seireuq-esac
dna
,)4-epyTQ(
seireuq-ecnetnes-tnemmoc
,)3-epyTQ(
seireuq-tnemmoc
,)2-epyTQ(
)noiretirc
noitaulave
dna
MF
𝜇F
P
R
tes-yreuQ
aTREBmaL
srotcev
FDI-FT
aTREBmaL
srotcev
FDI-FT
aTREBmaL
FDI-FT
aTREBmaL
srotcev
FDI-FT
i
sgniddebme
sgniddebme
sgniddebme
sgniddebme
Q
246.0
616.0
146.0
516.0
346.0
716.0
146.0
516.0
1
1-epyTQ
Q
586.0
976.0
486.0
676.0
786.0
486.0
286.0
476.0
2 Q
576.0
526.0
576.0
426.0
476.0
626.0
776.0
326.0
3 Q
554.0
823.0
454.0
423.0
654.0
623.0
454.0
133.0
4 Q
027.0
236.0
917.0
826.0
227.0
336.0
917.0
136.0
5 Q
287.0
517.0
287.0
017.0
487.0
027.0
187.0
117.0
6 Q
675.0
855.0
575.0
755.0
775.0
955.0
575.0
755.0
1
2-epyTQ
Q
466.0
995.0
366.0
895.0
666.0
406.0
266.0
595.0
2 Q
178.0
465.0
948.0
365.0
488.0
665.0
958.0
365.0
3 Q
957.0
091.0
727.0
681.0
967.0
312.0
847.0
271.0
4 Q
706.0
425.0
606.0
225.0
906.0
625.0
606.0
225.0
5 Q
686.0
626.0
486.0
526.0
096.0
826.0
286.0
426.0
6 Q
133.0
313.0
133.0
213.0
333.0
513.0
923.0
213.0
1
3-epyTQ
Q
123.0
892.0
023.0
792.0
223.0
003.0
023.0
692.0
2 Q
153.0
433.0
053.0
333.0
353.0
733.0
943.0
233.0
3 Q
152.0
732.0
052.0
632.0
352.0
142.0
942.0
432.0
4 Q
133.0
112.0
033.0
902.0
333.0
412.0
033.0
902.0
5 Q
273.0
363.0
173.0
163.0
373.0
563.0
273.0
163.0
6
464 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
1 3
)deunitnoc(
31
elbaT
MF
𝜇F
P
R
tes-yreuQ
aTREBmaL
srotcev
FDI-FT
aTREBmaL
srotcev
FDI-FT
aTREBmaL
FDI-FT
aTREBmaL
srotcev
FDI-FT
i
sgniddebme
sgniddebme
sgniddebme
sgniddebme
Q
232.0
722.0
132.0
622.0
432.0
722.0
032.0
722.0
1
4-epyTQ
Q
322.0
602.0
322.0
502.0
322.0
702.0
222.0
502.0
2 Q
662.0
062.0
562.0
852.0
862.0
162.0
562.0
952.0
3 Q
371.0
361.0
271.0
461.0
571.0
461.0
171.0
361.0
4 Q
181.0
151.0
081.0
051.0
381.0
251.0
081.0
151.0
5 Q
842.0
732.0
742.0
532.0
052.0
832.0
642.0
632.0
6 Q
292.0
682.0
292.0
482.0
492.0
982.0
092.0
382.0
1
5-epyTQ
Q
472.0
992.0
503.0
892.0
113.0
403.0
003.0
492.0
2 Q
293.0
003.0
293.0
992.0
193.0
203.0
393.0
892.0
3 Q
382.0
572.0
282.0
572.0
582.0
672.0
282.0
472.0
4 Q
904.0
083.0
804.0
873.0
114.0
283.0
704.0
873.0
5 Q
554.0
604.0
454.0
504.0
654.0
804.0
454.0
404.0
6
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 465
1 3
ksat noitaulave noitciderp elcitra erawa-etubirtta
eht
ni
desu dna CCI eht ni dedivorp
yllanigiro
snoisividbus koob fo sgnidaeh euqinU
41
elbaT
)hsilgnE ni detalsnart( setubirttA
setubirttA
-adnuof dna snoitaicossa‘
:4 ,’snoisivorp lareneg‘ :3 ,’snosrep lagel‘ :2 ,’snosrep larutan‘
:1
e inoizaicossa‘ :4 ,’ilareneg
inoizisopsid‘
:3 ,’ehcidiruig enosrep‘ :2 ,’ehcisfi enosrep‘
:1
1-kooB
:7 ,’ecnediser dna
elicimod‘
:6 ,’seettimmoc dna snoitaicossa dezingocernu‘ :5 ,’snoit
,’aznediser e oilicimod‘
:6 ,’itatimoc
e etuicsonocir non inoizaicossa‘ :5 ,’inoizadnof
demuserp fo noitaralced‘
:9 ,’ecnesba‘ :8 ,’htaed demuserp fo noitaralced dna ecnesba‘
etrom id enoizaraihcid‘
:9 ,’aznessa‘
:8 ,’atnuserp etrom id enoizaraihcid e aznessa‘
:7
-tsixe esohw ro nwonknu
si ecnetsixe esohw nosrep eht rof snosaer elbissop‘ :01 ,’htaed
aznetsise’l arongi is iuc
id anosrep alla
onotepmoc ehc ilautneve inoigar‘ :01 ,’atnuserp
:31 ,’egairram‘ :21
,’ytinffia
dna pihsnik‘ :11 ,’htaed demuserp deralced neeb sah
ecne
,’oinomirtam‘ :21 ,’àtinffia
e aletnerap‘
:11 ,’atnuserp etrom al ataraihcid atats è iuc id
o
egairram dna sretsinim
cilohtaC erofeb detarbelec egairram‘ :41 ,’egairram fo esimorp‘
otluc led irtsinim a itnavad
otarbelec
oinomirtam‘ :41 ,’oinomirtam id assemorp‘ :31
detarbelec egairram‘
:51 ,’etats eht ni dettimda pihsrow fo sretsinim erofeb detarbelec
:51 ,’otats ollen issemma
itluc ied irtsinim
a itnavad otarbelec oinomirtam e ocilottac
seitilamrof yranimilerp‘
:71 ,’egairram rof snoitidnoc yrassecen‘ :61 ,’rartsiger eht erofeb
eirassecen inoizidnoc‘ :61
,’elivic otats
olled elaicffiu’lla itnavad otarbelec oinomirtam‘
egairram‘ :02 ,’egairram
fo noitarbelec‘ :91 ,’egairram ot noitisoppo‘ :81 ,’egairram
rof
inoizisoppo‘ :81 ,’oinomirtam
led iranimilerp
àtilamrof‘ :71 ,’oinomirtam errartnoc rep
,’egairram fo ytillun‘
:12
,’modgnik eht ni srengierof dna yrtnuoc ngierof a ni snezitic
fo
ni inidattic ied oinomirtam‘
:02 ,’oinomirtam
led enoizarbelec‘ :91 ,’oinomirtam
la
-sira seitud dna sthgir‘
:42 ,’snoisivorp lanep‘ :32 ,’egairram fo noitarbelec fo foorp‘
:22
evorp‘ :22 ,’oinomirtam
led àtillun‘
:12 ,’onger len ireinarts ilged e oreinarts eseap
ylimaf‘ :62 ,’sesuops
fo
noitarapes dna egairram fo noitulossid‘ :52 ,’egairram morf
gni
ehc irevod e ittirid‘ :42
,’ilanep inoizisopsid‘
:32 ,’oinomirtam led enoizarbelec alled
lanoitnevnoc‘
:92
,’ytinummoc lagel‘ :82 ,’dnuf lainomirtap‘ :72 ,’emiger ytreporp
,’iguinoc ied enoizarapes
e oinomirtam
led otnemilgoics‘ :52 ,’oinomirtam lad onocsan
:33 ,’sutats dlihc‘ :23
,’ssenisub
ylimaf‘ :13 ,’emiger noitarapes ytreporp‘ :03 ,’ytinummoc
enoinumoc‘ :82 ,’elainomirtap
odnof‘
:72 ,’ailgimaf alled elainomirtap emiger‘ :62
fo snoitca dna lained
fo
noitca‘ :53 ,’noitailfi fo ecnedive‘ :43 ,’ytinretap fo noitpmuserp‘
:13 ,’ineb ied enoizarapes
id emiger‘
:03 ,’elanoiznevnoc enoinumoc‘ :92 ,’elagel
fo tuo nrob nerdlihc
fo
noitingocer‘ :63 ,’sutats dlihc eht fo tnialpmoc dna noitatsetnoc
alled evorp‘ :43 ,’àtinretap
id enoiznuserp‘
:33 ,’oilgfi id otats‘ :23 ,’erailimaf aserpmi‘
larutan fo noitamitigel‘
:83
,’ytinretam dna ytinretap fo noitaralced laiciduj‘ :73 ,’kcoldew
olled omalcer id e enoizatsetnoc
id inoiza
e otnemicsonocsid id enoiza‘ :53 ,’enoizailfi
:14 ,’stceffe sti dna elpoep
redlo fo noitpoda‘ :04 ,’elpoep redlo fo noitpoda‘ :93 ,’nerdlihc
-izaraihcid‘ :73 ,’oinomirtam
lad irouf
itan ilgfi ied otnemicsonocir‘ :63 ,’oilgfi id otats
fo seitud dna sthgir
dna
ytilibisnopser latnerap‘ :24 ,’elpoep redlo fo noitpoda fo smrof‘
,’ilarutan ilgfi ied enoizamittigel‘
:83
,’àtinretam alled e àtinretap alled elaiziduig eno
-lof ytilibisnopser latnerap
fo ecitcarp‘ :44 ,’dlihc eht fo seitud dna sthgir‘ :34 ,’dlihc
eht
e àte id iroiggam enosrep
id enoizoda‘
:04 ,’àte id iroiggam enosrep id enoizoda‘ :93
egairram fo ytillun ,tnemlunna
,stceffe livic fo noitanimret ,noitulossid ,noitarapes gniwol
àtilibasnopser‘ :24 ,’àte
eroiggam id
enosrep id enoizoda’lled emrof‘ :14 ,’itteffe ious
noitcetorp‘ :54 ,’kcoldew
fo tuo nrob nerdlihc ot gnitaler sgnideecorp fo emoctuo eht
ro
oizicrese‘ :44 ,’oilgfi
led irevod e
ittirid‘ :34 ,’oilgfi led irevod e ittirid e elairotineg
fo pihsnaidraug‘ :74
,’noitapicname
dna pihsnaidraug‘ :64 ,’esuba ylimaf tsniaga sredro
ilged enoizassec ,otnemilgoics
,enoizarapes
id otiuges a elairotineg àtilibasnopser alled
,’pihsnaidraug fo ecitcarp‘
:05 ,’erotutorp dna naidraug‘ :94 ,’egduj yraletut‘ :84 ,’sronim
itnemidecorp id otise’lla
orevvo oinomirtam
led àtillun ,otnemallunna ,ilivic itteffe
-name‘ :35 ,’tnuocca
lanfi
eht fo nruter‘ :25 ,’ecffio morf naidraug eht fo noitanimret‘
:15
isuba ilg ortnoc enoizetorp
id inidro‘
:54 ,’oinomirtam led irouf itan ilgfi ia ivitaler
ni gnikcal snosrep
rof
serusaem noitcetorp‘ :55 ,’ydotsuc dna noitailffia‘ :45 ,’noitapic
:94 ,’eraletut eciduig‘ :84
,’ironim ied aletut‘
:74 ,’enoizapicname e aletut‘ :64 ,’irailimaf
ytilibasid ,noitacfiilauqsid‘
:75 ,’noitartsinimda troppus‘ :65 ,’ymonotua trap ni ro elohw
,’oicffiu’llad erotut led
enoizassec‘ :15
,’aletut alled oizicrese‘ :05 ,’erotutorp e erotut‘
’stnemucod
sutats livic‘ :95 ,’ynomila‘ :85 ,’yticapacni larutan
dna
,’otnemadffia e enoizailffia‘
:45 ,’enoizapicname‘
:35 ,’elanfi otnoc led otnemidner‘ :25
:65 ,’aimonotua id etrap
ni do ottut
ni evirp enosrep elled enoizetorp id erusim‘ :55
,’elarutan àticapacni e
enoizatilibani
,enoizidretni‘ :75 ,’ongetsos id enoizartsinimma‘ ’elivic otats olled itta‘ :95 ,’itnemila‘ :85
466 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
1 3
ksat
noitaulave
noitciderp
elcitra
erawa-etubirtta
eht ni
desu
dna
CCI
eht
ni dedivorp
yllanigiro
snoisividbus
koob fo sgnidaeh
euqinU
).tnoc(
51
elbaT
)hsilgnE
ni detalsnart(
setubirttA
setubirttA
noitaled
,noisseccus
fo gninepo‘
:2 ,’noisseccus
no
snoisivorp
lareneg‘
:1
,enoisseccus
alled
arutrepa’
:2
,’inoisseccus
ellus ilareneg
inoizisopsid‘
:1
2-kooB
:5 ,’ssenihtrownu‘
:4
,’deeccus
ot
ytiliba‘ :3
,’ecnatirehni
fo noitisiuqca
dna
:5 ,’àtingedni‘
:4 ,’eredeccus
id
àticapac‘
:3 ,’àtidere’lled otsiuqca
e enoizaled
:8 ,’snoisivorp
lareneg‘
:7 ,’ecnatirehni
eht fo
ecnatpecca‘
:6 ,’noitatneserper‘
,’ilareneg
inoizisopsid‘
:7 ,’àtidere’lled
enoizattecca‘ :6 ,’enoizatneserppar‘
eht fo
esoht
morf stessa
s’desaeced
eht fo noitarapes‘
:9 ,’tfieneb
yrotnevni‘
illeuq
ad otnufed
led
ineb
ied
enoizarapes‘
:9 ,’oiratnevni’d
oicfieneb‘
:8
fo noititep‘
:21 ,’ecnatirehni
gniyl‘
:11 ,’ecnatirehni
fo mialcsid‘
:01 ,’rieh
enoizitep‘
:21 ,’etnecaig
àtidere‘
:11
,’àtidere’lla aiznunir‘
:01
,’edere’lled
tnemetatsnier‘
:51 ,’srieh
eht rof
devreser
sthgir‘
:41 ,’srieh‘
:31 ,’ecnatirehni
-etnier‘
:51 ,’iramittigel
ia itavresir
ittirid‘ :41 ,’iramittigel‘
:31
,’àtidere
id
-seccus‘
:71
,’noisseccus
etamitigel‘
:61 ,’srieh
eht rof
devreser atouq
eht
fo
:71 ,’emittigel
inoisseccus‘
:61
,’iramittigel
ia atavresir atouq
alled
enoizarg
:02 ,’etats
eht
fo noisseccus‘
:91
,’esuops
fo noisseccus‘
:81 ,’sevitaler
fo
nois
enoisseccus‘
:91
,’eguinoc
led
enoisseccus‘
:81 ,’itnerap
ied enoisseccus‘
ot ytiliba‘
:22
,’tnematset
yb esopsid
ot ytiliba‘
:12
,’snoisseccus
yratnematset‘
-set rep
erropsid
id
àticapac‘
:12
,’eiratnematset
inoisseccus‘
:02
,’otats
olled
:52 ,’ stnematset
yranidro‘
:42 ,’stnematset
fo mrof‘
:32
,’tmematset
yb eviecer
,’itnematset
ied amrof‘
:32
,’otnematset
rep erevecir id àticapac‘
:22
,’otnemat
-set terces
dna
stnematset
cihpargoloh
fo noitacilbup‘
:62
,’stnematset
laiceps‘
ied
enoizacilbbup‘
:62
,’ilaiceps
itnematset‘
:52 ,’iranidro
itnematset‘
:42
,snoisivorp
lanoitidnoc‘
:82 ,’seicagel
dna srieh
fo
tnemhsilbatse‘
:72
,’stnemat
,’itagel
e edere id
enoizutitsi‘
:72
,’iterges
itnematset e fiargolo
itnematset
fo noitacover‘
:13 ,’noitercca
fo
thgir‘
:03 ,’seicagel‘
:92
,’ladom dna
drawrof
id ottirid‘
:03 ,’itagel‘
:92
,’iladom
e enimret
a ,ilanoizidnoc
inoizisopsid‘
:82
:43 ,’snoitutitsbus
yranidro‘
:33
,’snoitutitsbus‘:23
,’snoitisopsid
yratnematset
-sos‘
:23
,’eiratnematset
inoizisopsid
elled enoizacover‘ :13
,’otnemicsercca
,’noisivid‘
:63 ,’srotucexe
yratnematset‘
:53
,’snoitutitsbus
yrassimmocedfi‘
:53 ,’airassimmocedef
enoizutitsos‘
:43
,’airanidro enoizutitsos‘
:33
,’inoizutit
eetnaraugdna
noisivid
fo stceffe‘
:93 ,’stbed
fo
tnemyap‘
:83 ,’noitalloc‘
:73
ied otnemagap‘
:83
,’enoizalloc‘
:73
,’enoisivid‘
:63 ,’iratnematset
irotucese‘
:24 ,’tcap
ylimaf‘ :14
,’noisivid
fo
noissicser
dna
tnemlunna‘
:04
,’satouq
fo
otnemallunna‘
:04
,’etouq
elled
aiznarag
e enoisivid alled itteffe‘
:93
,’itibed
dna smrof‘
:44 ,’noitanod
yb
eviecer
dna esopsid
ot ytiliba‘
:34 ,’snoitanod‘
,’inoizanod‘
:24 ,’ailgimaf
id ottap‘
:14
,’enoisivid id airetam
ni enoissicser
e
’snoitanod
fo noitacover‘
:54
,’noitanod
fo stceffe
itteffe
e amrof‘
:44 ,’enoizanod
rep
erevecir id e erropsid
id àticapac‘
:34
’inoizanod
elled
enoizacover‘ :54
,’enoizanod
alled
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 467
1 3
ksat
noitaulave
noitciderp
elcitra
erawa-etubirtta eht ni
desu
dna
CCI
eht
ni dedivorp
yllanigiro snoisividbus
koob
fo sgnidaeh
euqinU
).tnoc(
61
elbaT
)hsilgnE ni detalsnart( setubirttA
setubirttA
-vommi‘
:4 ,’redro
etaroproc
eht
ni stessa‘
:3
,’lareneg ni stessa‘ :2 ,’stessa‘
:1
-ommi
ineb‘
:4 ,’ovitaroproc
enidro’llen
ineb‘ :3
,’elareneg
ni ineb‘
:2
,’ineb‘
:1
3-kooB
ot ,etats
eht ot gnignoleb
stessa‘
:6 ,’stiurf
livic‘
:5 ,’stessa elbavom dna
elba
e
icilbbup
itne
ilga
,otats olla itnenetrappa
ineb‘
:6 ,’itturf‘
:5 ,’ilibom
e
ilib
lareneg‘
:8 ,’ytreporp‘
:7
,’seitirohtua
lacitsaiselcce
ot dna seitirohtua cilbup
àteirporp‘
:9 ,’ilareneg
inoizisopsid‘
:8
,’àteirporp‘
:7 ,’icitsaiselcce
itne
ilga
:11 ,’ytreporp
larur
fo tnemegnarraer‘
:01
,’ytreporp
dednal‘ :9 ,’snoisivorp
,’elargetni
acfiinob‘
:11 ,’elarur àteirporp
alled
otnemanidroir‘
:01
,’airaidnof
:31 ,’sesnefed
revir dna
stniartsnoc
lacigoloegordyh‘
:21 ,’noitamalcer largetni‘
-sid‘
:41
,’aizilide
àteirporp‘ :31 ,’ilaivufl
esefid
e icigoloegordi
ilocniv‘
:21
,snoitavacxe
dna snoitatnalp
,sgnidliub
ni
secnatsid‘
:41 ,’ytreporp gnidliub‘
art
itsopretni
ipeis
e issof ,irum e ,ivacs
e inoigatnaip
,inoizurtsoc
ellen
eznat
dna sthgil‘
:51 ,’smottob
eht
neewteb
desopretni
segdeh dna sehctid ,sllaw
dna
otsiuqca
id
idom‘
:81
,’euqca‘ :71 ,’oidicillits‘
:61
,’etudev
e icul‘
:51
,’idnof
i
: 91 ,’ytreporp
gnisahcrup
fo
syaw‘
:81
,’sretaw‘
:71 ,’gnippird‘ :61 ,’sweiv
-fiiceps
,enoissecca‘
:02 ,’enoiznevni
e enoizapucco‘
:91 ,’àteirporp
alled
-ximda
dna noinu
,noitacfiiceps
,noissecca‘
:02 ,’noitnevni dna noitapucco‘
:22
,’àteirporp
alled asefid a inoiza‘
:12 ,’enoitsimmoc
e enoinu
,enoizac
:42 ,’sisuetyhpme‘
:32
,’ecafrus‘
:22
,’ytreporp
fo esnefed ni snoitca‘ :12 ,’erut
,’otturfusu‘
:52
,’enoizatiba
e osu ,otturfusu‘
:42
,’isuetfine‘
:32
,’eicfirepus‘
,’tcurfusu
morf gnisira
sthgir‘
:62
,’tcurfusu‘
:52
,’gnillewd dna esu ,tcurfusu‘
,’otturfusu’llad
itnecsan ihgilbbo‘
:72
,’otturfusu’llad
itnecsan
ittirid‘
:62
fo snoitacfiidom
dna
noitcnitxe‘
:82 ,’tcurfusu
morf gnisira snoitagilbo‘
:72
:03
,’enoizatiba
e osu‘ :92 ,’otturfusu’lled
inoizacfiidom
e enoiznitse‘
:82
-ivres evicreoc‘
:13
,’edutivres
laiderp‘
:03
,’gnillewd
dna esu‘ :92 ,’tcurfusu
,’ovittaoc
ociracs
e ottodeuqca‘ :23
,’evittaoc
ùtivres‘
:13 ,’ilaiderp
ùtivres‘
,’gnivird
kcol dna
troppus‘
:33
,’eganiard
evicreoc
dna tcudeuqa‘ :23 ,’edut
id avittaoc
enoizartsinimmos‘
:43
,’asuihc
id enoissfini
e oiggoppa‘
:33
evicreoc‘
:53 ,’dnuorg
ro
gnidliub
a ot retaw
fo noitartsinimda evicreoc‘
:43
ottodorttele‘
:63
,’ovittaoc oiggassap‘
:53 ,’odnof
nu a
o oicfiide
nu
a
auqca
:73 ,’syawelbac
fo
egassap
evicreoc
dna
enil
rewop evicreoc‘ :63 ,’egassap
:83
,’eiratnolov
ùtivres‘
:73 ,’ehcirefelet
eenil id
ovittaoc
oiggassap
e
ovittaoc
esu eht
rof
dna noipacusu
rof desahcrup
edutivres‘
:83 ,’edutivres yratnulov‘
,’ailgimaf
id erdap
led enoizanitsed
rep
e enoipacusu
rep
etatsiuqca
ùtivres‘
eht fo noitcnitxe‘
:04
,’edutivres
eht
fo ecitcarp‘
:93 ,’ylimaf a fo rehtaf eht
fo
asefid
a inoiza‘
:14
,’ùtivres elled enoiznitse‘
:04
,’ùtivres
elled oizicrese‘
:93
-noc edutivres
emos‘
:24
,’edutivres
eht fo
esnefed
ni snoitca ’:14 ,’edutivres
o aserp
id
ùtivres‘
:34 ,’euqca id airetam
ni ùtivres
enucla‘
:24 ,’ùtivres
elled
fo edutivres‘
:44 ,’noisrevid
ro
ekatni
retaw
fo
edutivres‘ :34 ,’retaw gninrec
:54
,’auqca
id iznava
ilged e ilocs ilged
ùtivres‘
:44 ,’auqca
id enoizavired
id
,’lareneg
ni
noinummoc‘
:64
,’noinummoc
‘ :54
,’retaw fo srevotfel dna sniard
,’icfiide
ilgen
oinimodnoc‘
:74 ,’elareneg
ni
enoinumoc‘
:64 ,’enoinumoc‘
,’noissessop
fo stceffe’
:94
,’noissessop‘
:84
,’sgnidliub
ni muinimodnoc‘
:74
erossessop
led ihgilbbo
e ittirid‘ :05
,’ossessop
led itteffe‘
:94 ,’ossessop‘
:84
noissessop‘
:15 ,’ytreporp
eht
nruter
ot renwo
eht
fo snoitagilbo dna sthgir‘
:05
:25
,’ilibom
ineb
id
edef anoub id ossessop‘
:15
,’asoc alled
enoizutitser
allen
fo esnefed
ni snoitca‘
:35 ,’noitpacusu‘
:25
,’htiaf
doog ni ytreporp elbavom
fo
arepo
avoun
id aiznuned‘
:45 ,’ossessop
led asefid
a inoiza‘
:35 ,’enoipacusu‘
’egamad
deraef
dna
krow wen
fo
noitaicnuned‘ :45 ,’noissessop
’otumet
onnad
id
e
468 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
1 3
ksat noitaulave noitciderp elcitra erawa-etubirtta eht ni desu
dna
CCI eht ni dedivorp yllanigiro snoisividbus koob fo sgnidaeh euqinU ).tnoc(
71
elbaT
)hsilgnE ni detalsnart( setubirttA
setubirttA
ni tnemllfiluf‘ :4 ,’snoitagilbo fo tnemllfiluf‘ :3 ,’snoisivorp yranimilerp‘ :2 ,’lareneg ni snoitagilbo‘
:1
-meda‘ :4 ,’inoizagilbbo elled otnemipmeda‘ :3 ,’iranimilerp inoizisopsid‘ :2 ,’elareneg ni inoizagilbbo‘
:1
4-kooB
fo syaw‘ :8 ,’snoitagilbo fo tluafed‘ :7 ,’rotiderc fo tluafed‘ :6 ,’noitagorbus htiw tnemyap‘ :5 ,’lareneg
otnemipmedani‘ :7 ,’erotiderc led arom‘ :6 ,’enoizagorrus noc otnemagap‘ :5 ,’elareneg ni otnemip
-ufnoc‘ :21 ,’ffo-tes‘ :11 ,’noissimer‘ :01 ,’noitavon‘ :9 ,’ecnamrofrep naht rehto snoitagilbo gnihsiugnitxe
,’enoizavon‘ :9 ,’otnemipmeda’llad isrevid inoizagilbbo elled enoiznitse id idom‘ :8 ,’inoizagilbbo
elled
,’stiderc fo tnemngissa‘:41 ,’rotbed eht ot elbatubirtta ton snosaer rof derrucco ytilibissopmi‘ :31 ,’nois
asuac rep atunevvarpos àtilibissopmi‘ :31 ,’enoisufnoc‘ :21 ,’enoizasnepmoc‘ :11 ,’enoissimer‘
:01
,’snoitagilbo yrainucep‘ :71 ,’snoitagilbo fo sdnik emos‘ :61 ,’noitpmussa dna noisserpxe ,noitageled‘ :51
,’ollocca e enoissimorpse ,enoizageled‘ :51 ,’itiderc ied enoissec‘ :41 ,’erotibed la elibatupmi
non
,’snoitagilbo elbisividni dna elbisivid‘ :02 ,’snoitagilbo lareves dna tnioj‘ :91 ,’snoitagilbo evitanretla‘ :81
:91 ,’evitanretla inoizagilbbo‘ :81 ,’eirainucep inoizagilbbo‘ :71 ,’inoizagilbbo id eiceps enucla‘
:61
fo esuac‘ : 42 ,’seitrap eht fo tnemeerga‘ :32 ,’stnemeriuqer tcartnoc‘ :22 ,’lareneg ni stcartnoc‘ :12
:22 ,’elareneg ni ittartnoc‘ :12 ,’ilibisividni e ilibisivid inoizagilbbo‘ :02 ,’odilos ni inoizagilbbo‘
:82 ,’tcartnoc eht ni noitidnoc‘ :72 ,’tcartnoc eht fo mrof‘ :62 ,’tcartnoc eht fo tcejbo‘ :52 ,’tcartnoc eht
,’ottartnoc led otteggo‘ :52 ,’ottartnoc led asuac‘ :42 ,’itrap elled odrocca‘ :32 ,’ottartnoc led itisiuqer‘
esualc ytlanep‘ :13 ,’snoisivorp lareneg‘ :03 ,’tcartnoc eht fo stceffe‘ :92 ,’tcartnoc eht fo noitaterpretni‘
itteffe‘ :92 ,’ottartnoc led enoizaterpretni‘ :82 ,’ottartnoc len enoizidnoc‘ :72 ,’ottartnoc led amrof‘
:62
,’tcartnoc eht fo refsnart‘ :43 ,’detnioppa eb ot nosrep rof tcartnoc‘ :33 ,’noitatneserper‘ :23 ,’tisoped dna
:33 ,’aznatneserppar‘ :23 ,’arrapac e elanep alosualc‘ :13 ,’ilareneg inoizisopsid‘ :03 ,’ottartnoc
led
fo ytilibadiov‘ :83 ,’tcartnoc eht fo ytillun‘ :73 ,’noitalumis‘ :63 ,’seitrap driht fo rovaf ni tcartnoc‘ :53
:63 ,’izret id erovaf a ottartnoc‘ :53 ,’ottartnoc led enoissec‘ :43 ,’eranimon ad anosrep rep ottartnoc‘
eht fo noitanimret‘ :24 , ’tnemlunna rof noitca‘ :14 ,’tnesnoc fo seciv‘ :04 ,’yticapacni‘ :93 ,’tcartnoc eht
led iziv‘ :04 ,’àticapacni‘ :93 ,’ottartnoc led àtiliballunna‘ :83 ,’ottartnoc led àtillun‘ :73 ,’enoizalumis‘
-sopmi derrucco‘ :54 ,’tnemllfiluf-non ot eud noitanimret‘ :44 ,’tcartnoc eht fo noituloser‘ :34 ,’tcartnoc
,’ottartnoc led enoizulosir‘ :34 ,’ottartnoc led enoissicser‘ :24 ,’otnemallunna id enoiza‘ :14 ,’osnesnoc
,’elas‘ :94 ,’stcartnoc laudividni‘ :84 ,’stcartnoc remusnoc‘ :74 ,’ssensuoreno evissecxe‘ :64 ,’ytilibis
:74 ,’àtisoreno avissecce‘ :64 ,’atunevvarpos àtilibissopmi‘ :54 ,’otnemipmedani rep enoizulosir‘
:44
elbavom fo elas‘ :35 ,’noitpmeder lanoitnevnoc‘ :25 ,’snoitagilbo s’reyub‘ :15 ,’snoitagilbo s’relles‘ :05
:15 ,’erotidnev led inoizagilbbo‘ :05 ,’atidnev‘ :94 ,’ittartnoc ilognis‘ :84 ,’erotamusnoc led ittartnoc‘
ot tcejbus elas‘ :65 ,’elpmas ,lairt ,lavorppa ot tcejbus elas‘ :55 ,’sdoog remusnoc fo elas‘ :45 ,’sgniht
atidnev‘ :45 ,’ilibom esoc id atidnev‘ :35 ,’elanoiznevnoc ottacsir‘ :25 ,’erotarpmoc led inoizagilbbo‘
-uces tbed fo elas drawrof‘ :85 ,’stnemucod tsniaga tnemyap htiw dna stnemucod no elas‘ :75 ,’pihsrenwo
noc atidnev‘ :65 ,’enoipmac a ,avorp a ,otnemidarg id avresir noc atidnev‘ :55 ,’omusnoc id ineb
ied
-noc noitamitse‘ :36 ,’egnahcxe‘ :26 ,’nruter‘ :16 ,’ecnatirehni fo elas‘ :06 ,’etatse laer fo elas‘ :95 ,’seitir
atidnev‘ :85 ,’itnemucod ortnoc otnemagap noc e itnemucod us atidnev‘ :75 ,’àteirporp alled avresir
:96 ,’dnal citsur fo tner‘ :86 ,’tner’ :76 ,’dnal nabru fo esael‘ :66 ,’esael‘ :56 ,’noitartsinimda‘ :46 ,’tcart
,’otropir‘ :16 ,’àtidere id atidnev‘ :06 ,’ilibommi esoc id atidnev‘ :95 ,’otiderc id ilotit id enimret
a
,’sgniht fo tropsnart‘ :37 ,’elpoep fo tropsnart‘ :27 ,’tropsnart‘ :17 ,’tcartnoc’ :07 ,’remraf tcerid ot tner‘
id enoizacol‘ :66 ,’enoizacol‘ :56 ,’enoizartsinimmos‘ :46 ,’oirotamitse ottartnoc‘ :36 ,’atumrep‘
:26
:87 ,’tnarraw eht fo noitanimret‘ :77 ,’snoitagilbo s’lapicnirp’ :67 ,’snoitagilbo s’tnega‘ :57 ,’tnarraw‘ :47
,’otlappa‘ :07 ,’otterid erotavitloc a ottffia‘ :96 ,’icitsur idnof id ottffia‘ :86 ,’ottffia‘ :76 ,’inabru
idnof
-neg ni tisoped‘ :38 ,’tisoped‘ :28 ,’noitaidem’ :18 ,’tcartnoc ycnega‘ :08 ,’tnempihs‘ :97 ,’noissimmoc’
led inoizagilbbo‘ :57 ,’otadnam‘ :47 ,’esoc id otropsart‘ :37 ,’enosrep id otropsart‘ :27 ,’otropsart‘
:17
eerf‘ :78 ,’noitacsfinoc lanoitnevnoc‘ :68 ,’sesuoheraw lareneg ni tisoped‘ :58 ,’letoh ni tisoped‘ :48 ,’lare
:97 ,’enoissimmoc‘ :87 ,’otadnam led enoiznitse‘ :77 ,’etnadnam led inoizagilbbo‘ :67 ,’oiratadnam
tisoped efas‘ :29 ,’stisoped knab‘ :19 ,’stcartnoc knab‘ :09 ,’tnuocca gnikcehc‘ :98 ,’egagtrom‘ :88 ,’naol
:48 ,’elareneg ni otisoped‘ :38 ,’otisoped‘ :28 ,’enoizaidem‘ :18 ,’aiznega id ottartnoc‘ :08 ,’enoizideps‘
,’gniknab tnuocca gnikcehc‘ :59 ,’ecnavda knab‘ :49 ,’gninepo tiderc knab‘ :39 ,’ecivres gniknab xob
-omoc‘ :78 ,’elanoiznevnoc ortseuqes‘ :68 ,’ilareneg inizzagam ien otisoped‘ :58 ,’ogrebla ni otisoped‘
,’ecnarusni egamad‘ :001 ,’ecnarusni‘ :99 ,’ytiunna efil‘ :89 ,’emocni lauteprep‘ :79 ,’tnuocsid knab‘ :69
oizivres‘ :29 ,’iracnab itisoped‘ :19 ,’iracnab ittartnoc‘ :09 ,’etnerroc otnoc‘ :98 ,’outum‘ :88
,’otad
:601 ,’yterus‘ :501 ,’teb dna emag‘ :401 ,’snoisivorp lanfi‘ :301 ,’ecnarusnier‘ :201 ,’ecnarusni efil‘ :101
,’airacnab enoizapicitna‘ :49 ,’oiracnab otiderc id arutrepa‘ :39 ,’azzerucis id ettessac elled oiracnab
,’rotbed lapicnirp dna rotnaraug neewteb pihsnoitaler‘ :701 ,’rotnaraug dna rotiderc neewteb pihsnoitaler‘
atidner‘ :89 ,’auteprep atidner‘ :79 ,’oiracnab otnocs‘ :69 ,’etnerroc otnoc ni eiracnab inoizarepo‘
:59
:111 ,’tnarraw tiderc‘ :011 ,’yterus fo noitanimret‘ :901 ,’srotnaraug lareves neewteb pihsnoitaler‘ :801
:201 ,’ativ allus enoizarucissa‘ :101 ,’innad i ortnoc enoizarucissa‘ :001 ,’enoizarucissa‘ :99 ,’aizilativ
tbed‘ :511 ,’sesimorp laretalinu‘ :411 ,’srotiderc ot stessa fo refsnart‘ :311 ,’noitcasnart‘ :211 ,’isercitna‘
-par‘ :601 ,’enoissuiedfi‘ :501 ,’assemmocs e ocouig‘ :401 ,’ilanfi inoizisopsid‘ :301 ,’enoizarucissair‘
ssenisub‘ :911 ,’seitiruces deretsiger‘ :811 ,’seitiruces redro‘ :711 ,’seitiruces reraeb‘ :611 ,’seitiruces
art itroppar‘ :801 ,’elapicnirp erotibed e erossuiedfi art itroppar‘ :701 ,’erossuiedfi e erotiderc art
itrop
’sdeed lagelli‘ :221 ,’tnemhcirne sselesuac‘ :121 ,’tnemyap eudnu‘ :021 ,’tnemeganam
:211 ,’isercitna‘ :111 ,’otiderc id otadnam‘ :011 ,’enoissuiedfi alled enoiznitse‘ :901 ,’irossuiedfi
ùip
,’otiderc id ilotit‘ :511 ,’ilaretalinu essemorp‘ :411 ,’irotiderc ia ineb ied enoissec‘ :311 ,’enoizasnart‘ :021 ,’iraffa id enoitseg‘ :911 ,’ivitanimon ilotit‘ :811 ,’enidro’lla ilotit‘ :711 ,’erotatrop la ilotit‘
:611
’iticelli ittaf‘ :221 ,’asuac aznes otnemihccirra‘ :121 ,’otibedni’lled otnemagap‘
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 469
1 3
ksat noitaulave noitciderp elcitra erawa-etubirtta eht ni
desu
dna
CCI eht ni dedivorp yllanigiro snoisividbus
koob fo sgnidaeh euqinU ).tnoc(
81
elbaT
)hsilgnE ni detalsnart( setubirttA
setubirttA
evitcelloc
dna snoitaluger etaroproc‘ :3 ,’snoisivorp lareneg‘ :2 ,’seitivitca lanoisseforp fo noitaluger‘
:1
idrocca e evitaroproc eznanidro‘ :3 ,’ilareneg inoizisopsid‘
:2 ,’ilanoisseforp àtivitta elled anilpicsid‘
:1
5-kooB
,’esirpretne
ni krow‘ :5 ,’selur tnelaviuqe dna tnemeerga gniniagrab evitcelloc‘ :4 ,’stnemeerga cimonoce
:6 ,’aserpmi’llen oroval‘ :5 ,’etarapiuqe emron e oroval
id ovittelloc ottartnoc‘ :4 ,’ivittelloc icimonoce
-aler
tnemyolpme‘ :9 ,’ruenerpertne eht fo srotaroballoc‘ :8 ,’ruenerpertne‘ :7 ,’lareneg ni esirpretne‘
:6
:01 ,’oroval id otroppar‘ :9 ,’erotidnerpmi’lled irotaroballoc‘
:8 ,’erotidnerpmi‘ :7 ,’elareneg ni aserpmi‘
,’seitrap
eht fo snoitagilbo dna sthgir‘ :11 ,’pihsnoitaler tnemyolpme eht fo tnemhsilbatse‘ :01 ,’pihsnoit
,’aznetsissa e aznediverp‘ :21 ,’itrap elled ihgilbbo e
ittirid‘ :11 ,’oroval id otroppar led enoizutitsoc‘
-ivorp
lanfi‘ :41 ,’pihsnoitaler tnemyolpme eht fo noitanimret‘ :31 ,’ecnatsissa dna ytiruces laicos‘
:21
,’alocirga aserpmi‘ :61 ,’oinicorit‘ :51 ,’ilanfi inoizisopsid‘
:41 ,’oroval id otroppar led enoiznitse‘
:31
:91
,’ynoloc laitrap‘ :81 ,’gnipporcerahs‘ :71 ,’esirpretne larutlucirga‘ :61 ,’pihsecitnerppa‘ :51 ,’snois
,’airaizrap adiccos‘ :12 ,’ecilpmes adiccos‘ :02 ,’adiccos‘
:91 ,’airaizrap ainoloc‘ :81 ,’airdazzem‘
:71
-orp lanfi‘
:32 ,’erutsap fo gnitnarg htiw adiccos‘ :22 ,’adiccos laitrap‘ :12 ,’adiccos elpmis’ :02 ,’adiccos‘
e ilaicremmoc eserpmi‘ :42 ,’elanfi enoizisopsid‘
:32 ,’olocsap id otnemirefnoc noc adiccos‘
:22
,’retsiger
ssenisub‘ :52 ,’noitartsiger ot tcejbus sesirpretne rehto dna sesirpretne laicremmoc‘ :42 ,’noisiv
:72 ,’enoizartsiger id ogilbbo‘ :62 ,’eserpmi elled ortsiger‘
:52 ,’enoizartsiger a etteggos eserpmi
ertla
,’noitatneserper‘
:82 ,’sesirpretne laicremmoc rof snoisivorp laiceps‘ :72 ,’noitartsiger fo noitagilbo‘
:62
:03 ,’ilibatnoc eruttircs‘ :92 ,’aznatneserppar‘ :82 ,’ilaicremmoc
eserpmi el rep iralocitrap inoizisopsid‘
-bus‘ :33
,’snoisseforp lautcelletni‘ :23 ,’tnemyolpme-fles‘ :13 ,’ycnevlosni‘ :03 ,’sdrocer gnitnuocca‘
:92
iralocitrap ni otanidrobus oroval‘ :33 ,’ilauttelletni inoisseforp‘
:23 ,’omonotua oroval‘ :13 ,’aznevlosni‘
:73 ,’ynapmoc
elpmis‘ :63 ,’ynapmoc‘ :53 ,’krow citsemod‘ :43 ,’spihsnoitaler ralucitrap ni krow etanidro
-par‘ :83 ,’icos i art itroppar‘ :73 ,’ecilpmes àteicos‘ :63
,’àteicos‘ :53 ,’ocitsemod oroval‘ :43 ,’itroppar
-moc
eht fo noitulossid‘ :93 ,’seitrap driht htiw spihsnoitaler‘ :83 ,’sredloherahs neewteb spihsnoitaler‘
etnematatimil elaicos otroppar led otnemilgoics‘ :04 ,’àteicos
alled otnemilgoics‘ :93 ,’izret i noc
itrop
noitanimoned
evitcelloc‘ :14 ,’redloherahs eno ot detimil pihsnoitaler laicos eht fo noitulossid‘ :04 ,’ynap
rep àteicos‘ :34 ,’ecilpmes atidnamocca ni àteicos‘
:24 ,’ovittelloc emon ni àteicos‘ :14 ,’oicos
nu a
cilbup
yb noitutitsnoc‘ :44 ,’ynapmoc kcots tnioj‘ :34 ,’ynapmoc pihsrentrap detimil‘ :24 ,’ynapmoc
ittap‘ :64 ,’irotadnof icos e irotomorp‘ :54 ,’enoizircsottos
acilbbup rep enoizutitsoc‘ :44 ,’inoiza
,’snoitubirtnoc‘
:74 ,’stnemeerga ’sredloherahs‘ :64 ,’srentrap gnidnuof dna sretomorp‘ :54 ,’noitpircsbus
,’aelbmessa‘ :94 ,’ivitapicetrap iraiznanfi itnemurts irtla
e inoiza‘ :84 ,’itnemirefnoc‘ :74 ,’ilaicosarap
dna noitartsinimda‘
:05 ,’gniteem ’sredloherahs‘ :94 ,’stnemurtsni laicnanfi ytiuqe rehto dna serahs‘
:84
elagel enoisiver‘ :35 ,’elacadnis oigelloc‘ :25 ,’irotartsinimma‘
:15 ,’ollortnoc e enoizartsinimma‘
:05
:55 ,’metsys
reit-owt‘ :45 ,’tidua yrotutats‘ :35 ,’srotidua yrotutats fo draob‘ :25 ,’srotcerid‘ :15 ,’lortnoc
:85 ,’ilaicos irbil‘ :75 ,’inoizagilbbo‘ :65 ,’ocitsinom
ametsis‘ :55 ,’ocitsilaud ametsis‘ :45 ,’itnoc
ied
,’etutats
eht ot stnemdnema’ :95 ,’teehs ecnalab‘ :85 ,’skoob ynapmoc‘ :75 ,’sdnob‘ :65 ,’metsys reit-eno‘
-icos‘ :16 ,’eraffa ocfiiceps onu da itanitsed inomirtap‘
:06 ,’otutats olled inoizacfiidom‘ :95 ,’oicnalib‘
,’seitirohtua
cilbup ro noitapicitrap etats htiw ynapmoc‘ :16 ,’ssenisub cfiiceps a rof dednetni stessa‘
:06
ni àteicos‘ :36 ,’elanoizan esseretni id àteicos‘ :26 ,’icilbbup
itne id o otats olled enoizapicetrap noc
àte
-nopser
detimil htiw ynapmoc‘ :46 ,’serahs yb detimil ynapmoc‘ :36 ,’tseretni lanoitan fo ynapmoc‘
:26
-nimma‘ :66 ,’etouq e itnemirefnoc‘ :56 ,’atatimil àtilibasnopser
a àteicos‘ :46 ,’inoiza rep atidnamocca
’sredloherahs‘
:76 ,’slortnoc dna noitartsinimda ynapmoc‘ :66 ,’serahs dna snoitubirtnoc‘ :56 ,’ytilibis
:96 ,’ovitutitsoc otta’lled inoizacfiidom‘ :86 ,’icos ied inoisiced‘
:76 ,’illortnoc e àteicos alled enoizartsi
-aroproc
fo noitadiuqil dna noitulossid‘ :96 ,’noitaicossa fo selcitra eht ot stnemdnema‘ :86 ,’snoisiced
:17 ,’àteicos id otnemanidrooc e enoizerid‘ :07 ,’ilatipac
id àteicos elled enoizadiuqil e otnemilgoics‘
:27 ,’ffo-nips
dna regrem ,noitamrofsnart‘ :17 ,’seinapmoc fo noitanidrooc dna tnemeganam‘ :07 ,’snoit
enoissics‘ :47 ,’àteicos elled enoisuf‘ :37 ,’enoizamrofsart‘
:27 ,’enoissics e enoisuf ,enoizamrofsart‘
detaroprocni
seinapmoc‘ :57 ,’seinapmoc fo ffo-nips‘ :47 ,’seinapmoc fo regrem’:37 ,’noitamrofsnart‘
:77 ,’icirtarucissa eutum e evitarepooc àteicos‘ :67
,’oretse’lla etiutitsoc àteicos‘ :57 ,’àteicos
elled
’:87 ,’seinapmoc
evitarepooc‘ :77 ,’seinapmoc ecnarusni lautum dna seinapmoc evitarepooc‘ :67 ,’daorba
:97 ,’etnelaverp àtilautum a evitarepooc àteicos id
ilareneg inoizisopsid‘ :87 ,’evitarepooc àteicos‘
satouq‘
:08 ,’noitaroprocni‘ :97 ,’ytilautum tnelaverp htiw seiteicos evitarepooc fo snoisivorp lareneg
:48 ,’icirtarucissa eutum‘ :38 ,’illortnoc‘ :28 ,’ilaicos
inagro‘ :18 ,’inoiza e etouq‘ :08 ,’enoizutitsoc‘
ni noitaicossa‘
:48 ,’seinapmoc ecnarusni lautum‘ :38 ,’slortnoc‘ :28 ,’seidob etaroproc‘ :18 ,’serahs
dna
ellus ittirid‘ :88 ,’oihcram‘ :78 ,’angesni e attid‘ :68
,’adneiza‘ :58 ,’enoizapicetrap ni enoizaicossa‘
-sudni
dna sthgir ytreporp lautcelletni‘ :88 ,’kramedart‘ :78 ,’ngis dna mrfi‘ :68 ,’mrfi‘ :58 ,’noitapicitrap
-rettel ongegni’lled erepo ellus erotua id ottirid‘ :98 ,’ilairtsudni
inoiznevni ellus e ongegni’lled
erepo
lairtsudni
rof wal tnetap‘ :09 ,’skrow lautcelletni citsitra dna yraretil no thgirypoc‘ :98 ,’snoitnevni
lairt
illedom rep otteverb id ottirid‘ :19 ,’ilairtsudni inoiznevni
rep otteverb id ottirid‘ :09 ,’ehcitsitra
e eira
noititepmoc‘
:29 ,’sledom dna sngised rof noitartsiger dna sledom ytilitu rof wal tnetap‘ :19 ,’snoitnevni
,’izrosnoc ied e aznerrocnoc alled anilpicsid‘ :29 ,’illedom
e ingesid rep enoizartsiger id e àtilitu
id
eht
rof aitrosnoc‘ :59 ,’noititepmoc riafnu‘ :49 ,’selur noititepmoc‘ :39 ,’snoitaluger muitrosnoc
dna
alled otnemanidrooc li rep izrosnoc‘ :59 ,’elaels aznerrocnoc‘
:49 ,’aznerrocnoc alled anilpicsid‘
:39
,’aitrosnoc
yroslupmoc‘ :79 ,’seitivitca lanretxe htiw aitrosnoc‘ :69 ,’edart dna noitcudorp fo noitanidrooc
illortnoc‘ :89 ,’irotagilbbo izrosnoc‘ :79 ,’anretse àtivitta
noc izrosnoc‘ :69 ,’ibmacs ilged e enoizudorp
aitrosnoc
,seinapmoc gninrecnoc snoisivorp lanimirc‘ :99 ,’ytirohtua latnemnrevog eht yb slortnoc‘
:89
itne irtla id e izrosnoc id ,àteicos id airetam ni ilanep
inoizisopsid‘ :99 ,’avitanrevog àtirotua’lled
sesneffo‘
:201 ,’srotartsinimda yb dettimmoc sesneffo‘ :101 ,’ytislaf‘ :001 ,’seitirohtua etavirp rehto
dna
etnaidem issemmoc iticelli‘ :201 ,’irotartsinimma ilgad
issemmoc iticelli‘ :101 ,’àtislaf‘ :001 ,’itavirp
’serusaem
ytiruces tessa dna secnatsmucric gnitagitim ,sesneffo rehto‘ :301 ,’noissimo yb dettimmoc
’ilainomirtap azzerucis id erusim e itnaunetta
eznatsocric ,iticelli irtla‘ :301 ,’enoissimo
470 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
1 3
ksat noitaulave noitciderp
elcitra
erawa-etubirtta eht ni desu
dna
CCI eht ni dedivorp
yllanigiro snoisividbus
koob fo sgnidaeh
euqinU ).tnoc(
91
elbaT
)hsilgnE
ni detalsnart( setubirttA
setubirttA
:3 ,’seitreporp elbavommi
ot gnitaler
sdeed
fo
noitpircsnart‘
:2 ,’noitpircsnart‘
:1
:3 ,’ilibommi
ineb ia ivitaler
itta ilged enoizircsart‘
:2
,’enoizircsart‘
:1
6-kooB
-pircsnart‘ :4 ,’srotavresnoc
fo ytilibail
dna
sretsiger
etatse laer fo gnisitrevda‘
,’irotavresnoc
ied àtilibasnopser
e irailibommi irtsiger
ied àticilbbup‘
ot gnitaler noitpircsnart‘
:5 ,’ytreporp
elbavom
emos
ot gnitaler sdeed fo noit
enoizircsart‘ :5
,’ilibom ineb
inucla da ivitaler itta ilged
enoizircsart‘
:4
elbavom rehto ot
gnitaler noitpircsnart‘
:6 ,’selcihev
rotom dna tfarcria ,spihs
enoizircsart‘ :6 ,’ilocievotua
ilga
e ilibomorea ilga ,ivan
ella
etnemavitaler
,’ecnedive yratnemucod‘
:9 ,’snoisivorp
lareneg‘
:8 ,’ecnedive‘ :7 ,’seitreporp
:9 ,’ilareneg inoizisopsid‘
:8 ,’evorp‘
:7 ,’ilibom ineb irtla
da
etnemavitaler
seinapmoc fo sdrocer
gnitnuocca‘
:21
,’deed
etavirp‘
:11 ,’deed cilbup‘ :01
eruttircs‘ :21 ,’atavirp
aruttircs‘ :11
,’ocilbbup otta‘ :01 ,’elatnemucod
avorp‘
kram ro sezis‘
:41 ,’snoitcudorper
lacinahcem‘
:31 ,’noitartsiger ot tcejbus
-cem inoizudorpir‘
:31 ,’enoizartsiger
a etteggos eserpmi
elled ilibatnoc
-tiw‘ :71 ,’lawener
ro noitingocer fo
stca‘
:61
,’sdeed
fo seipoc‘ :51 ,’sehcton
itta‘ :61 ,’itta ilged eipoc‘
:51 ,’ongessartnoc
id ehccat o
eilgat‘
:41 ,’ehcinac
ytreporp‘ :12 ,’htao‘
:02 ,’noissefnoc‘
:91
,’snoitpmuserp‘
:81 ,’ecnedive ssen
-nuserp‘ :81 ,’elainomitset
avorp‘
:71 ,’enoizavonnir
id
o
enoizingocir
id
:22 ,’eetnaraug lainomirtap
eht fo noitneter
dna
noitpmeerp
fo sesuac ,ytilibail
-inomirtap àtilibasnopser‘
:12
,’otnemaruig‘ :02 ,’enoissefnoc‘
:91 ,’inoiz
-avom no segelivirp
lareneg‘ :42
,’selbavom
no
segelivirp‘ :32 ,’segelivirp‘
:22 ,’elainomirtap
aiznarag alled
enoizavresnoc e enoizalerp
id esuac
,ela
,’etatse laer revo
segelivirp‘ :62 ,’selbavom
niatrec
revo segelivirp‘ :52 ,’selb
:52 ,’ilibom ius ilareneg
igelivirp‘
:42 ,’ilibom ius igelivirp‘
:32 ,’igelivirp‘
:03 ,’ytreporp elbavom
fo egdelp‘
:92
,’egdelp’
:82 ,’segelivirp fo redro‘ :72
:72 ,’ilibommi ilg
arpos igelivirp‘
:62 ,’ilibom itanimreted
arpos igelivirp‘
:33 ,’egagtrom lagel‘
:23 ,’segagtrom‘
:13
,’sthgir
rehto dna stiderc fo egdelp‘
ongep‘ :03 ,’ilibom
ineb ied ongep‘
:92 ,’ongep‘ :82 ,’igelivirp
ied enidro‘
fo lawener dna noitartsiger‘
:53 ,’egagtrom
yratnulov‘
:43 ,’egagtrom laiciduj’
acetopi‘ :33 ,’elagel
acetopi‘
:23 ,’ehcetopi‘ :13 ,’ittirid
irtla e itiderc
id
stceffe‘ :93 ,’redro
egagtrom‘ :83 ,’lawener‘
:73
,’noitartsiger‘
:63 ,’segagtrom
elled enoizavonnir
e enoizircsi‘
:53 ,’airatnolov acetopi‘
:43 ,’elaiziduig
egagtrom eht
fo stceffe‘ :04 ,’reyub
driht
eht
ot tcepser htiw egagtrom’
fo
,’ehcetopi elled enidro‘
:83 ,’enoizavonnir‘
:73 ,’enoizircsi‘
:63 ,’ehcetopi
-yaper‘ :24 ,’segagtrom
fo noitcuder‘
:14
,’reyolpme
driht eht ot tcepser htiw
acetopi’lled itteffe‘
:04 ,’etneriuqca
ozret la ottepsir acetopi’lled
itteffe‘
:93
eht esaeler ot yaw‘
:44 ,’noitartsiger
fo
noitallecnac‘
:34 ,’segagtrom fo tnem
elled enoiznitse‘ :24
,’ehcetopi elled
enoizudir‘ :14 ,’erotad
ozret la ottepsir
ni rotiderc eht
fo noitnetsba dna
noitaicnuner‘
:54 ,’segagtrom morf stessa
ineb i erarebil id
odom‘ :44 ,’enoizircsi’lled
enoizallecnac‘
:34 ,’ehcetopi
,’eetnaraug lainomirtap
eht gnivreserp
fo
snaem‘
:64 ,’noitairporpxe decrof
enoizairporpse’llen
erotiderc led
enoisnetsa e aiznunir‘
:54
,’ehcetopi ellad
,’eruzies evitavresnoc‘
:94 ,’noitca
yrotacover‘
:84 ,’noitca noitagorbus‘ :74
:74 ,’elainomirtap
aiznarag
alled enoizavresnoc id
izzem‘
:64 ,’atazrof
-airporpxe‘ :25
,’ noitucexe decrof‘
:15
,’sthgir
fo noitcetorp laiciduj‘ :05
,’ovitavresnoc ortseuqes‘
:94 ,’airotacover
enoiza‘ :84 ,’airotagorrus
enoiza‘
,’tnemngissa dna
elas decrof fo stceffe‘
:45
,’erusolcerof
fo stceffe‘ :35 ,’noit
-orpse‘ :25 ,’atazrof
enoizucese‘
:15 ,’ittirid ied elanoizidsiruig
aletut‘
:05
eerf ro ytilibaliavanu
fo snoitcirtser
ot tcejbus
stessa fo noitairporpxe‘ :55
e atazrof atidnev alled
itteffe‘ :45
,’otnemarongip led itteffe‘
:35 ,’enoizairp
:85 ,’erutiefrof dna
noitpircserp‘ :75
,’noitucexe
decrof
cfiiceps‘ :65 ,’lasopsid
-sidni id ilocniv id
otteggo ineb
id enoizairporpse‘ :55
,’enoizangessa’lled
-pircserp fo noitanimret‘
:06 ,’noitpircserp
fo
noisnepsus‘
:95 ,’noitpircserp‘
amrof ni atazrof enoizucese‘
:65
,’otiutarg olotit a inoizaneila
id o àtilibinop
:36 ,’noitpircserp
yranidro‘ :26 ,’noitpircserp
fo
doirep noitatimil‘ :16 ,’noit
-nepsos‘ :95 ,’enoizircserp‘
:85
,’aznedaced e enoizircserp‘
:75 ,’acfiiceps
emit fo noitaluclac‘
:56 ,’noitpircserp
evitpmuserp‘
:46 ,’noitpircserp trohs‘
enimret‘ :16 ,’enoizircserp
alled
enoizurretni‘ :06 ,’enoizircserp
alled enois
’erutiefrof‘ :66 ,’stimil
:46 ,’iverb inoizircserp‘
:36 ,’airanidro
enoizircserp‘ :26
,’enoizircserp
alled
’aznedaced‘
:66 ,’inimret
ied otupmoc‘ :56 ,’evitnuserp
inoizircserp‘
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 471
Funding Open access funding provided by Università della Calabria within the CRUI-CARE Agreement.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen
ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Aletras N, Tsarapatsanis D, Preotiuc-Pietro D, Lampos V (2016) Predicting judicial decisions of the
European court of human rights: a natural language processing perspective. PeerJ Comput Sci 2:e93
Bahdanau D, Cho K, Bengio Y (2015) Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and trans-
late. In: Proc ICLR
Bengio S, Dembczynski K, Joachims T, Kloft M, Varma M (2019) Extreme classification. Tech. rep.,
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 18291. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4230/ DagRep. 8.7. 62
Boella G, Caro LD, Humphreys L (2011) Using classification to support legal knowledge engineers in the
Eunomos legal document management system. In: Proceedings of workshop on juris-informatics
(JURISIN)
Branting LK, Yeh AS, Weiss B, Merkhofer EM, Brown B (2017) Inducing predictive models for deci-
sion support in administrative adjudication. In: AI approaches to the complexity of legal systems—
AICOL workshops 2015-2017, vol 10791, pp 465–477
Branting K, Weiss B, Brown B, Pfeifer C, Chakraborty A, Ferro L, Pfaff M, Yeh AS (2019) Semi-super-
vised methods for explainable legal prediction. In: Proceedings of the international conference on
artificial intelligence and law (ICAIL). pp 22–31
Chalkidis I, Kampas D (2019) Deep learning in law: early adaptation and legal word embeddings trained
on large corpora. Artif Intell Law 27(2):171–198
Chalkidis I, Androutsopoulos I, Michos A (2018) Obligation and prohibition extraction using hierarchical
RNNs. In: Proceedings of annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (ACL), pp
254–259
Chalkidis I, Androutsopoulos I, Aletras N (2019). In: Proceedings of ACL (ed) Neural legal judgment
prediction in English. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 4317–4323
Chalkidis I, Fergadiotis M, Malakasiotis P, Aletras N, Androutsopoulos I (2019) Extreme multi-label
legal text classification: a case study in EU Legislation. In: Proceedings of natural legal language
processing (NLLP) workshop of NAACL-HLT. pp 78–87
Chalkidis I, Fergadiotis M, Malakasiotis P, Aletras N, Androutsopoulos I (2020) LEGAL-BERT: the
muppets straight out of law school. CoRR. arXiv: 2010. 02559
Conrad JG, Branting LK (2018) Introduction to the special issue on legal text analytics. Artif Intell Law
26(2):99–102
Dadgostari F, Guim M, Beling P, Livermore MA, Rockmore D (2021) Modeling law search as prediction.
Artif Intell Law 29(1):3–34
Devlin J, Chang M, Lee K, Toutanova K (2019) BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding. In: Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp 4171–4186
Dhillon IS, Modha DS (2001) Concept decompositions for large sparse text data using clustering. Mach
Learn 42(1/2):143–175
Do P, Nguyen H, Tran C, Nguyen M, Nguyen M (2017) Legal question answering using ranking SVM
and deep convolutional neural network. CoRR arXiv: 1703. 05320
Du C, Huang L (2018) Text classification research with attention-based recurrent neural networks. Int J
Comput Commun Control 13(1):50–61
Gan L, Kuang K, Yang Y, Wu F (2021) Judgment prediction via injecting legal knowledge into neural
networks. In: Proceedings of AAAI, pp 12866–12874. AAAI Press
Goldberg Y (2017) Neural network methods in natural language processing. Morgan and Claypool
Publishers
1 3
472 A. Tagarelli, A. Simeri
Goodfellow I, Y YB, Courville A, (2016) Deep learning. MIT Press, Cambridge
Hacker P, Krestel R, Grundmann S, Naumann F (2020) Explainable AI under contract and tort law: legal
incentives and technical challenges. Artif Intell Law 28(4):415–439
Hu Z, Li X, Tu C, Liu Z, Sun M (2018) Few-shot charge prediction with discriminative legal attributes.
In: Proceedings of COLING, pp 487–498. Association for Computational Linguistics
Jain AK, Dubes RC (1988) Algorithms for clustering data. Prentice-Hall
Jones KS (2004) A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application in retrieval. J Docu-
mentation 60(5):493–502
Kim Y (2014) Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification. In: Proceedings of EMNLP, pp
1746–1751
Kim M, Xu Y, Goebel R (2015) A convolutional neural network in legal question answering. In: Proc int
workshop on juris-informatics JURISIN
Lai S, Xu L, Liu K, Zhao J (2015) Recurrent convolutional neural networks for text classification. In:
Proceedings of AAAI, pp 2267–2273
Li S, Zhang H, Ye L, Guo X, Fang B (2019) MANN: a multichannel attentive neural network for legal
judgment prediction. IEEE Access 7:151144–151155
Lin W, Kuo T, Chang T, Yen C, Chen C, Lin S (2012) Exploiting machine learning models for Chinese
legal documents labeling, case classification, and sentencing prediction. IJCLCLP 17(4)
Liu C, Hsieh C (2006) Exploring phrase-based classification of judgment documents for criminal charges
in Chinese. In: Proceedings of ISMIS, pp 681–690
Liu YH, Chen YL, Ho WL (2015) Predicting associated statutes for legal problems. Inf Proces Manag
51(1):194–211
Liu P, Qiu X, Huang X (2016) Recurrent neural network for text classification with multi-task learning.
In: Proceedings of IJCAI, pp 2873–2879
Long S, Tu C, Liu Z, Sun M (2019) Automatic judgment prediction via legal reading comprehension. In:
Proceedings of Chinese computational linguistics. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 11856,
pp 558–572
Luo B, Feng Y, Xu J, Zhang X, Zhao D (2017) Learning to predict charges for criminal cases with legal
basis. In: Proceedings of EMNLP, pp 2727–2736
Medvedeva M, Vols M, Wieling M (2020) Using machine learning to predict decisions of the European
court of human rights. Artif Intell Law 28(2):237–266
Morimoto A, Kubo D, Sato M, Shindo H, Matsumoto Y (2017) Legal question answering system using
neural attention. In: Proceedings of 4th ICAIL competition on legal information extraction and
entailment (COLIEE). EPiC series in computing, vol 47, pp 79–89
Nallapati R, Manning CD (2008) Legal docket classification: where machine learning stumbles. In: Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP, pp 438–446
Nanda R, Adebayo KJ, Caro LD, Boella G, Robaldo L (2017) Legal information retrieval using topic
clustering and neural networks. In: Proceedings of 4th ICAIL competition on legal information
extraction and entailment (COLIEE). EPiC series in computing, vol 47, pp 68–78
Nguyen T, Nguyen L, Tojo S, Satoh K, Shimazu A (2017) Single and multiple layer BI-LSTM-CRF for
recognizing requisite and effectuation parts in legal texts. In: Proceedings of ICAL workshops
Nguyen T, Nguyen L, Tojo S, Satoh K, Shimazu A (2018) Recurrent neural network-based models for
recognizing requisite and effectuation parts in legal texts. Artif Intell Law 26(2):169–199
Nguyen H, Nguyen PM, Vuong T, Bui QM, Nguyen CM, Dang TB, Tran V, Nguyen ML, Satoh K (2021)
JNLP team: Deep learning approaches for legal processing tasks in COLIEE 2021. CoRR arXiv:
2106. 13405
O’Neill J, Buitelaar P, Robin C, O’Brien L (2017) Classifying sentential modality in legal language: a
use case in financial regulations, acts and directives. In: Proceedings of international conference on
artificial intelligence and law (ICAIL), pp 159–168
Peters ME, Neumann M, Iyyer M, Gardner M, Clark C, Lee K, Zettlemoyer L (2018) Deep contextual-
ized word representations. In: Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp 2227–2237
Polignano M, Basile P, de Gemmis M, Semeraro G, Basile V (2019) AlBERTo: Italian BERT language
understanding model for NLP challenging tasks based on tweets. In: Proceedings of 6th Italian con-
ference on computational linguistics. CEUR workshop proceedings, vol 2481. http:// ceur- ws. org/
Puccinelli D, Demartini S, D’Aoust RE (2019) Fixing comma splices in Italian with BERT. In: Proceed-
ings of 6th Italian conference on computational linguistics. CEUR workshop proceedings, vol 2481.
http:// ceur- ws. org/
1 3
Unsupervised law article mining based on deep pre‑trained… 473
Rabelo J, Kim M, Goebel R (2019) Combining similarity and transformer methods for case law entail-
ment. In: Proceedings of International conference on artificial intelligence and law (ICAIL), pp
290–296
Rabelo J, Kim M, Goebel R, Yoshioka M, Kano Y, Satoh K (2020) Workshops. New frontiers in artificial
intelligence, lecture notes in computer science. COLIEE 2020: methods for legal document retrieval
and entailment. In: Proceedings of the vol 12758. Springer, pp 196–210
Radford A, Sutskever I (2018) Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. In: arxiv
Sanchez L, He J, Manotumruksa J, Albakour D, Martinez M, Lipani A (2020) Easing legal news monitor-
ing with learning to rank and BERT. In: Proceedings of ECIR. Lecture notes in computer science,
vol 12036, pp 336–343. Springer
Shao Y, Mao J, Liu Y, Ma W, Satoh K, Zhang M, Ma S (2020) BERT-PLI: modeling paragraph-level
interactions for legal case retrieval. In: Proceedings of IJCAI, pp 3501–3507
Sulea O, Zampieri M, Malmasi S, Vela M, Dinu LP, van Genabith J (2017) Exploring the use of text clas-
sification in the legal domain. In: Proceedings of ICAIL workshop on automated semantic analysis
of information in legal texts
van der Maaten L, Hinton G (2008) Visualizing high-dimensional data using t-SNE. J Mach Learn Res
9:2579–2605
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, Kaiser L, Polosukhin I (2017) Atten-
tion is all you need. In: Proceedings of NIPS, pp 5998–6008
Viola L (2017) Interpretazione della legge con modelli matematici. Diritto Avanzato 26
Wang P, Yang Z, Niu S, Zhang Y, Zhang L, Niu S (2018) Modeling dynamic pairwise attention for crime
classification over legal articles. In: Proceedings of ACM SIGIR, pp 485–494
Yamakoshi T, Komamizu T, Ogawa Y, Toyama K (2019) Japanese mistakable legal term correction using
infrequency-aware BERT classifier. In: Proceedings of IEEE international conference on big data,
pp 4342–4351
Yang Z, Yang D, Dyer C, He X, Smola AJ, Hovy EH (2016) Hierarchical attention networks for docu-
ment classification. In: Proceedings of NAACL-HLT. The Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pp 1480–1489
Yang W, Jia W, Zhou X, Luo Y (2019) Legal judgment prediction via multi-perspective bi-feedback net-
work. In: Proceedings of IJCAI, pp 4085–4091
Ye H, Jiang X, Luo Z, Chao W (2018) Interpretable charge predictions for criminal cases: learning to
generate court views from fact descriptions. In: Proceedings of NAACL-HLT, pp 1854–1864
Yin W, Kann K, Yu M, Schütze H (2017) Comparative study of CNN and RNN for natural language pro-
cessing. CoRR arXiv: 1702. 01923
Yoshioka M, Aoki Y, Suzuki Y (2021) BERT-based ensemble methods with data augmentation for legal
textual entailment in COLIEE statute law task. In: Proceedings of the 18th international conference
for artificial intelligence and law (ICAIL), pp 278–284. ACM
Zhao Y, Karypis G (2004) Empirical and theoretical comparisons of selected criterion functions for docu-
ment clustering. Mach Learn 55(3):311–331
Zhou P, Shi W, Tian J, Qi Z, Li B, Hao H, Xu B (2016) Attention-based bidirectional long short-term
memory networks for relation classification. In: Proceedings of ACL
Zhou X, Zhang Y, Liu X, Sun C, Si L (2019) Legal intelligence for e-commerce: multi-task learning by
leveraging multiview dispute representation. In: Proceedings of ACM SIGIR, pp 315–324
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
maps and institutional affiliations.
1 3