Fine-tuning Pretrained Multilingual BERT Model
for Indonesian Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis
Annisa Nurul Azhar Masayu Leylia Khodra
School of Electrical Engineering and Informatics School of Electrical Engineering and Informatics
Institut Teknologi Bandung Institut Teknologi Bandung
Bandung, Indonesia Bandung, Indonesia
23519025@std.stei.itb.ac.id masayu@stei.itb.ac.id
Abstract—Although previous research on Aspect-based suppressed. Moreover, these days, techniques with transfer
Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) for Indonesian reviews in hotel learning approach has been successfully achieving higher
domain has been conducted using CNN and XGBoost, its performance on various natural language processing tasks
model did not generalize well in test data and high number of such as question answering, sentiment analysis, and
OOV words contributed to misclassification cases. Nowadays, semantic textual similarity, as compared to non-transfer
most state-of-the-art results for wide array of NLP tasks are learning techniques. This progress certainly affected by the
achieved by utilizing pretrained language representation. In
evolution of pretraining method used to pretrain the
this paper, we intend to incorporate one of the foremost
pretrained model. One of the foremost methods is
language representation model, BERT, to perform ABSA in
Bidirectional Encoder Representation from Transformers
Indonesian reviews dataset. By combining multilingual BERT
(BERT) by Devlin et al. (2018) which able to achieve state-
(m-BERT) with task transformation method, we manage to
of-the-art result on most of natural language processing
achieve significant improvement by 8% on the F1-score
tasks. BERT is the first method to introduce unsupervised
compared to the result from our previous study.
and deeply bidirectional approach for pretraining a language
Keywords—pretrained language model, aspect-based
representation model.
sentiment analysis, sentence-pair classification, sequential
Pretrained BERT model has been extensively used to
transfer learning, fine-tuning
address ABSA task. Generally, there are two approaches for
I. INTRODUCTION utilizing pretrained BERT model or any pretrained model
for specific NLP task according to recent work by Ruder, S.
Sentiment analysis has been widely used among
(2019) on transfer learning in NLP namely feature
companies to automatically extract opinions about their
extraction and fine-tuning. The difference between the two
products or services. Several companies may need more
approaches is that in feature extraction, parameters of the
fine-grained analysis by employing aspect-based sentiment
pretrained model are freezed meanwhile in fine-tuning they
analysis (ABSA). Typically, ABSA task is broken down
are adjusted to be more specific to the downstream task. For
into two subtask, aspect extraction/categorization and
most of the time, fine-tuning approach works better than the
sentiment classification (Liu, B., 2012). Aspect
feature extraction. It makes sense because fine-tuning
extraction/categorization aims to extract aspect terms
approach is able to obtain task-specific knowledge. One of
(aspect extraction) e.g. “helpful staff” or categorize aspect
the recent works which fine-tuned the pretrained BERT
terms (aspect categorization) into some predetermined
model for Targeted ABSA (T-ABSA) task is conducted by
categories e.g. “service”. Next, the process of determining
Sun, et al. (2019) and it is able to achieve state-of-the-art
sentiment e.g. “positive”, “negative” or “neutral” towards
result on Sentihood and Semeval-2014 dataset.
each aspect is conducted in sentiment classification subtask.
ABSA itself is considered as a single sentence
As a final result, aspect-based sentiment analysis system
classification task because it takes a single sentence as an
returns output pairs of aspect and its sentiment which exist
input and perform classification on it. According to the
in the review text.
original work on BERT by Devlin et al. (2018), the
Previous study about ABSA for Indonesian reviews has
pretrained BERT model could also be used for single
been conducted by utilizing Convolutional Neural Network
sentence classification tasks despite pretrained for sentence-
(CNN) and Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) by
pair classification task which is Next Sentence Prediction
Azhar A.N. (2019) and Azhar, et al. (2019) to perform both
(NSP). However, Sun, et al. (2019) found that there is no
aspect categorization and sentiment classification. CNN is
significant raise on T-ABSA performance by directly fine-
employed as a feature extractor and XGBoost for top-level
tuned the pretrained model. So, they proposed to modify T-
classifier. However, it was found that the model does not
ABSA task first from single sentence classification task into
generalize well in the test set. Misclassification cases due to
sentence-pair classification task before fine-tuning the
out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words still occur a lot. Therefore,
pretrained model by constructing auxiliary sentences to be
new technique needs to be utilized to build a better model.
paired with the original review texts. This approach then
Transfer learning from pretrained language
managed to obtain significantly higher performance than the
representation model seems to be a promising approach to
single sentence method.
solve the problems mentioned above. Pretrained models are
In this work, we conduct a comparative experiment to
commonly pretrained on a large-scale dataset hence it would
search for the best combination of strategy for using
generalize well and most of words would present in the
pretrained model (feature extraction and fine-tuning) and
vocabulary so the number of OOV words could be
approach to solve ABSA task (as single sentence
978-1-7281-8038-0/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
classification task and as sentence pair classification task) in Answering (QA) through fine-tuning method by only
Indonesian language. We will use the proposed method by adding one classification layer (Devlin, et al., 2018).
Sun, et al. (2019) to construct the auxiliary sentences to The architecture of the BERT model is a multi-layer
convert ABSA into sentence-pair classification task. Since bidirectional Transformer encoder as implemented by
pretrained BERT model for Indonesian language is Vaswani, et al. (2017). In their work, Devlin, et al. (2018)
currently non-existent for public use, we will use the
states the number of layers which are also Transformer
multilingual one which is already available for public. Next,
blocks as L, hidden size as H, and self-attention heads as
we perform hyperparameter tuning while training the model
A. There are two variations of the BERT model based on
using the best combination from the previous experiment.
its size, namely BERT-Base with L = 12, H = 768, and A =
We also analyze the difference between using a BERT-
12 and BERT-Large with L = 24, H = 1024, and A = 16).
based unilingual pretrained model and multilingual one in
BERT pretrained multilingual language model (m-
terms of vocabulary issue.
BERT) is pretrained with training set in which there are 104
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses
languages, including Indonesian language. Indonesian
related works i.e. sequential transfer learning (Ruder, S.,
2019), m-BERT (Devlin, et al., 2018), and sentence-pair training data is taken from all Wikipedia dumps in
classification for ABSA (Sun, et al., 2019). Our Indonesian, which consists of 532,806 articles. For the
methodology will be discussed in section 3. The pretraining process, BERT is trained to complete two tasks
implementation and dataset used for this work will be namely masked language model (MLM) and next sentence
described in section 4. Section 5 and section 6 will explain prediction (NSP). In order to conduct bidirectional model
about the experiments, result, and the analysis. Finally, training, some input tokens will be masked (replacing
conclusions of this work will be discussed in section 7. tokens with [MASK] tokens) randomly then the model will
predict these tokens based on other tokens that are not
II. RELATED WORK
masked. The prediction is done by adding one classification
A. Sequential Transfer Learning layer above the output of the encoder then the resulting
The term “sequential transfer learning” is first output vector will be multiplied by the embedding matrix.
introduced by Ruder, S. (2019) to define settings in transfer Finally, the overall probability of words in the vocabulary
learning when source and target tasks are not the same and is calculated by the softmax activation function. In its
the trainings are done sequentially. There are two main implementation, BERT changes 15% of the total input
steps in sequential transfer learning, namely the pretraining tokens to [MASK] tokens.
As for NSP, the BERT model needs to be trained with
step and the adaptation step. By using a BERT pretrained
NSP task because some tasks in NLP such as NLI and QA
model, we do not need to perform the first step since it is
already done before. We only need to do the adaptation step require information about the relationship between two
to transfer the knowledge into a target task. For the sentences (sentence-pair) but that information cannot be
adaptation step, there are generally two strategies, namely obtained by training in MLM task only. This process is
feature extraction and fine-tuning. In the feature extraction done by providing input in the form of sentence pairs
strategy, representations generated from the learning of the (sentence A and sentence B) then the model will predict
pretrained model are used as input features for training a whether sentence B is the next sentence after sentence A on
separate model. The parameters in the pretrained model the corpus. As many as 50% of the training data uses the
will be frozen so that they will not change during training actual follow-up sentence as sentence B and is labeled
on the target task. Meanwhile, in the fine-tuning strategy, IsNext and the rest uses random sentences from the corpus
learning for the target task is done directly on the pretrained and is labeled with NotNext. To be able to distinguish
sentences 1 and sentences 2, BERT will perform several
model. The parameters of the pretrained model then will be
pre-processes of the input so that it becomes an appropriate
adjusted during the training process on the target task
(Ruder, S., 2019). input representation for the BERT model.
B. Multilingual BERT C. ABSA as Sentence-pair Classification
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Pre-trained BERT has been used in recent work
conducted by Sun et al. (2019) to complete the ABSA task
Transformers or BERT is a language model that utilizes the
and successfully achieve state-of-the-art results in Semeval
encoder mechanism on Transformers in doing task
language modeling. The term bidirectional contained in 2014 Task 4. The proposed technique is to construct
BERT explains that in pretraining phase, the encoder in auxiliary sentences from the initial sentence before being
BERT reads the entire sequence of input words all at once used as input for the BERT model. The basic idea is to
(bidirectional), different from the techniques applied to change the ABSA task into a sentence pair classification
previous language models that read the sequence of input task. There are four methods considered to generate
words sequentially from left to right or from right to left auxiliary sentences namely Sentences for QA-M,
only (unidirectional). This resulted in the model being built Sentences for NLI-M, Sentences for QA-B, and Sentences
to be able to understand the context of the words before for NLI-B. Auxiliary sentences will contain all possible
(left-context) and the context of the words after (right combinations of entity-aspect-sentiment pairs (in ‘B’
context) of a word. With the ability to understand the settings) or entity-aspect pairs (in ‘M’ settings). Then, in
order to complete the ABSA task, fine-tuning is done by
context, the BERT instructional language model can
adding a classification layer to the output of the
improve performance in various tasks in NLP such as
Natural Language Inference (NLI) and Question Transformer.
QA-M and QA-B methods transform T-ABSA task into tokenize the text into a list of sub-words [“kama”, “##rny,
question-answering task therefore the auxiliary sentences “##a”, “be”, “##rsi”, “##h”, “dan”, “pela”, “##yanan”,
used in those methods are in question sentence form. “##nya”, “bag”, “##us”]. As we can see from the
Meanwhile, NLI-B and NLI-M methods transform the task tokenization result, base words in bahasa such as “kamar”
into natural language inference task and use pseudo- (room), “bersih” (clean), dan “bagus” (good) are also
sentence form for the auxiliary sentences. For ‘M’ and ‘B’, splitted into sub-words. This happens because those words
‘M’ stands for multiclass and ‘B’ for binary. The dataset are not present in the vocabulary thus the model take the
transformed using QA-M and NLI-M method will have its first-longest-match and split each word into sub-words
sentiment classes as the labels. Generally, there are two based on it.
classes for sentiment polarity namely ‘positive’ and
A. Methodology for Single Sentence Classification
‘negative’. However, ‘none’ class is needed to point out
pairs of entity-aspect contained in generated auxiliary In feature extraction step we actually convert the
sentences which are not present in the actual review text so tokenized input into BERT input representation. There are
the sentiment polarities cannot be classified as ‘positive’ or three components of the input representation namely Token
‘negative’. Since it will always be more than 2 classes in Embeddings, Segment Embeddings, dan Position
the dataset and each instance should only belong to one Embeddings. First, we insert [CLS] token as the first token
class, therefore it is considered as multiclass setting. As for and [SEP] token as the last token after the last sub-word
QA-B and NLI-B methods, the labels will either be ‘0’ or from the tokenized input. Next, we lookup the embedding
‘1’ therefore it is considered as binary settings. Label ‘0’ matrix to get embeddings for each token called Token
means the combinations of entity-aspect-sentiment in the Embeddings. Since BERT also accept sentence-pair input,
corresponding auxiliary sentence is false since it is not Segment Embeddings are used to differentiate between
present in the actual review text and vice versa for label ‘1’. token from the first sentence and from the second sentence.
Token from the first sentence will be denoted by number
III. METHODOLOGY “0” meanwhile token from the second sentence will be
In this section, we will describe our methodology. We denoted by number “1”. Position embeddings is just the
will divide it into two parts. The first one will focus on our position of each token in the entire input sequence. Finally,
methodology to build ABSA model by using single BERT input representation is the sum of Token
sentence classification approach and the second one will be Embeddings, Segment Embeddings, and Position
for the one which uses sentence pair classification approach. Embeddings.
Methodology to build ABSA model by using m-BERT The next step is to train the m-BERT pretrained model
pretrained model based on single sentence classification on our dataset. To do that, we need to add a single
approach is shown in Fig. 1. We train one model to perform classification layer on top of the last Transformer encoder.
aspect categorization which is a multilabel classification Weights of [CLS] token from the output of the last
task with one-vs-all strategy (Bishop, 2006). For sentiment Transformer encoder will be fed as an input for the
classification, we train a single sentiment classification classification layer. Since we use one-vs-all strategy for
model for each aspect category. There are 10 aspect aspect categorization, the number of nodes in the
categories in our dataset so in total, we train 11 models to classification layer will be equal to the number of aspect
solve ABSA task. Detailed explanation for each category categories and sigmoid activation function will be applied.
are already described in our previous work (Azhar, et al., As for sentiment classification, there is one output node on
2019). the classification layer with softmax activation function. In
The processes for constructing the models are as feature extraction strategy, only the classification layer is
follows. First, we collect our dataset then create new trained using the BERT output. Meanwhile, in fine-tuning
smaller datasets from the original dataset by grouping each strategy, the entire model is trained using the BERT output.
review text based on what aspect categories that it has into
B. Methodology for Sentence Pair Classification
a new dataset for training the sentiment classification
models. After that, we train the models separately. The methodology for sentence-pair classification is in
However, before the training phase, we run some fact pretty similar to the one for single sentence
preprocessing steps; tokenization and feature extraction. classification. The model construction process for sentence-
Since we will use m-BERT pretrained model, for pair classification approach can be seen in Fig. 2. However,
in order to use sentence-pair classification approach, we
tokenization we also use BERT Tokenizer.
need to construct auxiliary sentence first so we could pair
The difference between traditional tokenization process
them with the reviews in the original dataset.
and BERT tokenization process is that BERT tokenization
There are four different methods to construct auxiliary
does not only perform basic tokenization steps (lower-
sentences as described in Section II. We decided to use the
casing, whitespace removal, etc.) but also uses WordPiece
NLI-B method straight-off due to limited resources to
(Wu, et al., 2016; Schuster & Nakajima, 2012) tokenizer to
experiment with each method and also because it produces
tokenize the text. WordPiece is one of word segmentation
the highest result in most of the experiment scenarios. Thus,
techniques which will broke down words that are non-
we generate all possible combinations of aspect category
existing in the vocabulary into sub-words thus lowering the and sentiment polarity which are present in the original
number of OOV words. Algorithm used to construct the dataset then transform to pseudo-sentence form for the
sub-words is greedy first-longest-match. For example, auxiliary sentences. With this construction method, train
given a sentence “kamarnya bersih dan pelayanannya dataset will be composed by pairs of review sentence and
bagus” (room is clean and service is good). BERT will auxiliary sentence which is a pseudo-sentence consists of
pairs between aspect category and its sentiment polarity difference is we have to add 2 separator tokens [SEP], the
with binary label, “0” or “1”. Label 0 means the aspect- first one placed between the last token of the first sentence
sentiment pair is not present in the corresponding review and the first token of the second sentence. The other one is
text and label 1 means the opposite. The illustration of train placed at the end of the second sentence after its last token.
dataset for sentence-pair classification can be seen in Table For training phase in sentence-pair classification approach,
1. The first sentence, which is the auxiliary sentence, is we only need to train one classifier to perform both aspect
denoted as ‘text_a’, the actual review text is denoted as categorization and sentiment classification. Simply add one
‘text_b’, and the class is denoted as ‘label’. classification layer with on top of the Transformer output
and apply softmax activation function. The architecture of
the BERT model for sentence-pair classification can be seen
in Fig 3.
Fig. 1 Model Construction Process for
Single Sentence Classification Fig. 3 BERT Model Architecture for Sentence-pair Classification
IV. IMPLEMENTATION AND DATASET
The implementation of this work uses Python
programming language with the Tensorflow 1.15 library
and is run at Google Collaboratory
(https://colab.research.google.com/) using the Tensor
Processing Unit or TPU hardware accelerator
(https://cloud.google.com / tpu) with 8 cores. Most of the
code for preprocessing and utilizing the BERT pretrained
language model was adapted from the code in the BERT
repository (https://github.com/google-research/bert) and
modified so it would be able to perform multilabel
classifications for aspect categorization model, able to use
Fig. 2 Model Construction Process for Sentence-pair Classification feature extraction strategy, and could use distributed
Table 1. Illustration of train dataset for sentence-pair classification. training with TPU. Script for generating sentence-pair
training data and do performance evaluation is implemented
text_a (aux. sentence) text_b (actual review text) Label
by ourselves using the Numpy, Pandas, and Sklearn
kamarnya bersih dan
service-positif libraries.
pelayanannya bagus (the room 1
(service-positive) is clean and the service is nice) For experiment, we use Airyrooms’ (former Indonesian
service-negatif kamarnya bersih dan accommodation network orchestrator) users review dataset
0
(service-negative) pelayanannya bagus with a total of 9448 instances. As for dataset that has been
service-none kamarnya bersih dan 0 modified into sentence-pairs, the number of instances has
(service-none) pelayanannya bagus
increased to around 283,483 instances. Furthermore, this
kebersihan-positif kamarnya bersih dan
1 two datasets will be split into 80% training data and 20%
(cleanliness-positive) pelayanannya bagus
validation data. We will also use the same test data as used
kebersihan-negatif kamarnya bersih dan
0
(cleanliness-negative) pelayanannya bagus in previous studies (Azhar, A.N., 2019; Azhar, et al., 2019)
kebersihan-none kamarnya bersih dan so that the performance of the two models can be compared.
0
(cleanliness-none) pelayanannya bagus
V. EXPERIMENT
The next steps, tokenization and feature extraction, are
typically the same with the single-sentence-approach. The As mentioned in the introduction regarding the purpose
of the experiment, there are several factors that will be
compared in the experiment, namely the problem solving B. Experiment Result for Hyperparameter Tuning
approach, the strategy to adapt a pretrained language
After finding the best task-solving approach and
model, and hyperparameters value to choose when learning
adaptation strategy in the previous experiment, another
from the BERT pretrained language model
experiment is conducted to find the best combination of
(hyperparameter tuning). The details of the experimental
hyperparameter values combination using sentence-pair
factors can be seen in Table 2.
classification as task-solving approach and fine-tuning as
Table 2. Details of the experimental factors the adaptation strategy. The results of the experiment can
be seen in Table 5. The selection of the learning rate value
Task-solving approach Single sentence classification,
sentence-pair classification greatly determines the performance of the model because
Strategy for model adaptation Feature extraction, fine-tuning in the fine-tuning strategy, updates made to the parameters
of the pretrained model depend on the value of the learning
Learning hyperparameters Learning rate, batch size
rate. If the value of learning rate is set too large, it is feared
Due to limited resource and time, we choose what
that the adjustments made will be excessive so that it can
hyperparameters we would like to tune based on fine-
lose the knowledge that has been obtained by the pretrained
tuning procedure in Devlin, et al. (2018) except epoch,
model after going through the pretraining process. This can
which are learning rate and batch size. There are 2 values
cause the model to overfit.
for learning rate and 2 values for batch size that will be
searched for the best combination using the grid search. Based on Table 5, the best combination of learning rate
The values of the parameters that will be combined can be and batch size values is 2e-5 and 32. It can be seen that the
seen in Table 3. The number of epochs is 25 epochs. The selection of a smaller learning rate at 2e-5 obtain slightly
experimental scheme used is hold-out with 80% data as better result than 3e-5 so learning rate value of 2e-5 is
training data and 20% data as validation data. chosen to be used for full training. However, the difference
in performance of each combination is not significant. This
Table 3. Details of hyperparameter tuning
is consistent with observations made in the work from
Hyperparameter Values Number of Combinations Devlin, et al., 2018 that large datasets (more than 100,000
Learning rate 3e5, 2e-5 2
instances) are far less sensitive to hyperparameter selection
Batch size 16, 32 2
than smaller datasets.
Total 4
VI. RESULT AND ANALYSIS Table 5. Experiment result for Hyperparameter tuning
Hyperparameter Values F1-score
A. Experiment Result for Task-solving approach and
Learning rate 3e-5
strategy for model adaptation 0.9721
Batch size 16
Experiment result for the first scenario can be seen in Learning rate 2e-5
0.9739
Batch size 16
Table 4. By using the fine-tuning strategy in the two
Learning rate 3e-5
approaches, we could see better performances than the 0.9744
Batch size 32
feature-extraction strategy with a difference of around 8%. Learning rate 2e-5
0.9751
The fine-tuning strategy obtained better result because the Batch size 32
parameters in the pretrained language model are also
C. Evaluation
updated so that it is exposed to the specific knowledge of
After the final model was trained using the best
the target task. Meanwhile, in the feature extraction
strategy, the parameters in the pretrained language model configuration based on experiment results, the performance
are frozen so that only the parameters of the last layer of the model was compared with the performance of the
(classification layer) are trained. model from previous studies by Azhar, A.N. (2019) which
used the CNN-XGBoost method to solve ABSA task. We
Table 4. Experiment result for Task-solving approach and strategy for
model adaptation use the same evaluation method to for both problem solving
method. A performance comparation between the two
Strategy for
Task-solving approach F1-score models in test dataset can be seen in Table 6. In Table 6, it
model adaptation
Feature Extraction 0.8764 can be seen that by using problem solving method proposed
Single Sentence Classification
Fine-tuning 0.8943 in this work, the performance of the model in test dataset
Feature Extraction 0.9553 has significantly increased. This means that the
Sentence-Pair Classification
Fine-tuning 0.9751 generalization of the model is getting much better
compared to previous studies. However, it should be
It also can be seen from Table 4 that in general the
remembered that the training time for fine-tuning the BERT
sentence-pair classification approach gets significantly
pretrained model with auxiliary sentences has a
better performance compared to the single sentence
considerable difference with the training time of the model
classification approach, same as the overall experiment
with the CNN-XGBoost method. Even with TPU as
result done by Sun, et al. (2019). Therefore, it can be taken
hardware accelerator, the training time is 6 times longer
that the ability of the pretrained model can be exploited
than the CNN-XGBoost training time without hardware
more optimally by converting single sentence classification
accelerator.
task into sentence pair classification task so it will be more
Table 6. Evaluation Result
similar to NSP task which the pretrained model was trained
Problem Solving Method F1-score
on.
CNN-XGBoost 0.8958
Fine-tuning m-BERT + Auxiliary Sentences 0.9765
D. Analysis separated from the basic word. Therefore, it is likely that
Compared to misclassification cases that occur in the semantic information from words cannot be represented
evaluation from previous studies, many of them do not re- well enough with the BERT pretrained model so that the
occur in current evaluation. These sentences are then model still cannot fully determine the keywords that
classified correctly by the model built by fine-tuning the m- indicate the existence of certain aspect category or
sentiments correctly which is why such misclassification
BERT pretrained model in this study. This is most likely
cases still occur.
caused by the improved language representation by BERT
and the tokenization technique. BERT uses a wordpiece VII. CONCLUSION
tokenization (Wu, et al., 2016; Schuster & Nakajima, 2012)
In this paper, we transform ABSA task from single
so that the tokenization process is done based on sub-
sentence classification task into sentence-pair classification
words. This technique certainly causes the OOV case to be
task by constructing auxiliary sentences based on work
much reduced, from 401 OOV words to zero OOV words,
done by Sun, et al. (2019). We conduct comparative
because when it finds that certain word does not exist in the
experiment to compare task-solving approach and
vocabulary, it will search for the longest sub-word of that
pretrained model adaptation strategy used to solve ABSA
word that exist in the vocabulary (greedy first-longest-
task, perform hyperparameter tuning, and built the final
match algorithm). One of the misclassification cases that is
model by fine-tuned the BERTpretrained model using
caused by OOV words from previous study and is now
sentence-pair Indonesian reviews dataset. We compare
predicted correctly can be seen in Table 7. There is a typo
evaluation result with the result from previous study. We
on the word “sncak” which should be “snack” and the word
also analyze misclassification cases which still occur and
“sncak” is not in the training data.
discussed the vocabulary issue on using a multilingual
Table 7. Example case #1
pretrained model.
Review kamar tidur dan kamar mandi bersih, sncak lengkap For future works, we suggest to train a new wordpiece
(The bedroom and bathroom is clean, snack is full) vocabulary and pretrain BERT language model which is
Prediction ac_P1-neg
specific for Indonesian language to tackle the vocabulary
Ground-truth ac_P1-none
issue in multilingual model. Try combining different types
Misclassification that still occur are caused by of text i.e. news, review, and academic for pretraining
mislabeled data and there are keywords for the aspect BERT so the model will be exposed to various text
category or other sentiments contained in the review when structures and contexts thus yields better language
in fact the phrases that contain these keywords have a representation.
neutral sentiment polarity. Hence, it cannot be associated
with positive sentiment as well as negative sentiment. In
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
this study, the neutral sentiment class was not taken into We would like to thank Airyrooms for providing us with
consideration, so the aspect category that has neutral the Indonesian hotel reviews dataset and for the cooperation
sentiment polarity should not be detected. Example of such during research period.
cases is described in Table 8.
REFERENCES
Table 8. Example case #2
[1] Liu, B. (2012). Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining. Morgan &
Review Kamar (#209) berbau apek ketika pertama kali Claypool Publishers
masuk. Nampaknya sudah lama tidak ditempati dan
[2] Azhar, A. N. (2019). Kategorisasi Aspek dan Klasifikasi Sentimen
AC lama tidak dinyalakan. (The room (# 209)
untuk Teks Ulasan Berbahasa Indonesia pada Domain Hotel.
smelled musty when I first entered. It seems that it Undergraduate Thesis, Institut Teknologi Bandung, Bandung.
has not been occupied for a long time and the old air
[3] Azhar, A. N., Khodra, M. L., & Sutiono, A. P. (2019). Multi-label
conditioner has not been turned on for so long)
Aspect Categorization with Convolutional Neural Networks and
Prediction linen_P1-none
Extreme Gradient Boosting. International Conference on Electrical
Ground-truth linen_P1-pos
Engineering and Informatics (ICEEI). Bandung: IEEE.
Other misclassification causes are the same as the cause [4] Ruder, S. (2019). Neural Transfer Learning for Natural Language
Processing. PhD Thesis, National University of Ireland, Galway.
of one of the misclassification cases in previous studies;
[5] Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). BERT:
there is a contradictory sentiment towards an aspect
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
category in a sentence. When such cases occur, since our
Understanding. Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, (pp. 4171–
study focuses heavily on how to detect negative sentiments 4186).
rather than detecting positive sentiments, the instance is [6] Sun, C., Huang, L., (2019). Utilizing BERT for Aspect-Based
labeled as having negative sentiments even though the Sentiment Analysis via Constructing Auxiliary Sentence.
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT.
keyword from positive sentiments is also exist in the
[7] Vaswani, A., et al. (2017). Attention is All You Need. Advances in
review. Therefore, it is pretty difficult for the model to give
Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (NIPS 2017).
correct prediction.
[8] Wu, et al. (2016). Google's Neural Machine Translation System:
However, the BERT pretrained model used in this study Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation.
is a multilingual model so that the words contained in the [9] Schuster, M. and Nakajima, K., (2012). Japanese and Korean voice
vocabulary come from various languages and many basic search. 2012 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
words from Indonesian are not in the vocabulary. This and Signal Processing (ICASSP)
causes the results of tokenization are often not very good [10] Christopher M. Bishop. 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine
Learning (Information Science and Statistics). Springer-Verlag,
because it even split the basic words. In fact, the basic word
Berlin, Heidelberg.
should not be splitted, only the prefixes need to be