INNOVATIVE BERT-BASED RERANKING LANGUAGE MODELS FOR SPEECH
RECOGNITION
Shih-Hsuan Chiu and Berlin Chen
National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan
{shchiu, berlin}@ntnu.edu.tw
ABSTRACT in many real-world scenarios is still far from perfect [2][3][4].
To remedy this problem, a lightweight treatment is to rerank
More recently, Bidirectional Encoder Representations from (or rescore) the N-best hypotheses generated by ASR with
Transformers (BERT) was proposed and has achieved more elaborate autoregressive language models, such as high-
impressive success on many natural language processing order n-gram language models [5][6][7], the recurrent neural
(NLP) tasks such as question answering and language network (RNN) and its improvements with long short-term
understanding, due mainly to its effective pre-training then memory (LSTM) units [8][9][10][11], as well as extra
fine-tuning paradigm as well as strong local contextual linguistic or acoustic information clues. By doing so, we can
modeling ability. In view of the above, this paper presents a avoid any modification of the modules of an ASR system and
novel instantiation of the BERT-based contextualized thus have fast experimental turnover. Notably, the family of
language models (LMs) for use in reranking of N-best RNN-based language models have shown significant and
hypotheses produced by automatic speech recognition (ASR). consistent superiority across many ASR hypothesis reranking
To this end, we frame N-best hypothesis reranking with tasks in relation to the conventional high-order n-gram
BERT as a prediction problem, which aims to predict the language models, partly attributed to their better ability of
oracle hypothesis that has the lowest word error rate (WER) capturing longer dependence relationships among words.
given the N-best hypotheses (denoted by PBERT). In
In the recent past, a novel neural network-based
particular, we also explore to capitalize on task-specific
contextualized language model, viz. Bidirectional Encoder
global topic information in an unsupervised manner to assist
Representations from Transformers (BERT) [12], has been
PBERT in N-best hypothesis reranking (denoted by
proposed and achieved unprecedented success in a wide array
TPBERT). Extensive experiments conducted on the AMI
of natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as question
benchmark corpus demonstrate the effectiveness and
answering [13] and language understanding [14]. This can be
feasibility of our methods in comparison to the conventional
attributed to its flexible pre-training then fine-tuning
autoregressive models like the recurrent neural network
paradigm as well as excellent local contextual modeling
(RNN) and a recently proposed method that employed BERT
ability. Nevertheless, as far as we are concerned, BERT has
to compute pseudo-log-likelihood (PLL) scores for N-best
not been sufficiently and systematically studied in the context
hypothesis reranking.
of ASR N-best hypothesis reranking. Building on these
observations, this paper presents a novel instantiation of
Index Terms— automatic speech recognition, language
BERT-based contextualized language models for use in
models, BERT, N-best hypotheses reranking
reranking of N-best hypotheses produced by ASR. To this end,
we formulate N-best hypothesis reranking with BERT as a
1. INTRODUCTION prediction problem, which aims to predict the oracle
hypothesis that has the lowest word error rate (WER) given
Due to the dramatic progress in automatic speech recognition the N-best hypotheses as the input (denoted by PBERT).
(ASR) with various sophisticated deep neural network (DNN) Notably, we also explore to leverage task-specific topic
modeling techniques, alongside the availability of large information in an unsupervised manner to supplement
amounts of training data and powerful computational PBERT in the reranking process (denoted by TPBERT). To
resources, there has been widespread adoption of ASR the best of our knowledge, TPBERT is the first to integrate
solutions in many daily life applications such as virtual unsupervised topic modeling, which captures the global topic
assistants, smart speakers, interactive voice responses (IVR) information about the task of interest, into a BERT-based
and among others [1][2]. However, the performance of ASR method for ASR hypothesis reranking.
With the above background, in this paper we put forward
Predicted Scores of Hypotheses
a novel N-best hypothesis reranking framework, which has at
0.2 0.5 … … 0.1
least two noteworthy extensions to the existing state-of-the-
FNN + softmax art, mainstream methods. First, we leverage BERT as an
encoder to simultaneously generate the semantic embeddings
of all N-best hypotheses, instead of using LSTM to generate
… the embedding of each hypothesis in a one-by-one or pairwise
manner. This way, the embedding of each hypothesis is a
function of the entire N-best list, with both intra- and inter-
Trm Trm Trm Trm
BERT hypothesis word-dependence relations (as well as sentence
Trm Trm Trm Trm
structures) taken into consideration. Second, the embeddings
[CLS] [SEP] of all N-best hypotheses are then fed into a fully-connected
But it’s useful hyp1 FNN at the same time (instead of in a pairwise manner as
BERT is useful hyp2 [25]), while these embeddings can be further augmented with
...
their corresponding task-specific topic representations as
Bird is full hypN
extra features to achieve better prediction of the hypothesis
out from the N-best list that has the lowest WER.
Figure 1: A schematic depiction of PBERT for ASR
N-best hypothesis reranking.
3. PROPOSED RERANKING FRAMEWORK
3.1. Fundamentals of BERT
2. RELATED WORK
BERT [12] is a neural contextualized language model, which
In this section, we briefly review some representative
makes effective use of bi-directional self-attention (also
approaches to N-best hypothesis reranking for ASR. Recently,
called the Transformer [26]) to capture both short- and long-
along with the booming of various DNN modeling techniques
span contextual interaction between the tokens in its input
developed in ASR, the RNN-based LM and its extensions
sequences, usually in the form of words or word pieces. In
(e.g., LSTM and bidirectional-LSTM [15][16]) have emerged
contrast to the traditional embedding methods, the advantage
as the de facto standard for ASR N-best hypothesis reranking
of BERT is that it can produce different context-aware
[17][18]. In a follow-up study [19], the authors sought to
representations for the same word at different locations by
perform on-the-fly adaptation of the RNN-based LM in an
considering bi-directional dependence relations of words
autoregressive manner by augmenting its input at each time
across sentences. The training of BERT consists of two stages:
stamp with a context-aware vector inferred from the partial
pre-training and fine-tuning. At the pre-training stage, its
word sequence before the current time stamp. In a similar
model parameters can be estimated on huge volumes of
vein, the work in [20] explored a topic modeling approach to
unlabeled training data over different tasks such as the
extract topic features as additional inputs to the RNN-based
masked language model task and the next (relevant) sentence
LM for genre and topic adaptation on a multi-genre broadcast
prediction task. At the fine-tuning stage, the pre-trained
transcription task. Among other things, there have also been
BERT model, stacked with an additional single- or multi-
some research efforts devoted so as to modify the model
layer FNN, can be fine-tuned to work well on many NLP-
training strategy [21], retrofit the internal model components
related tasks when only a very limited amount of supervised
of an LSTM-based LM [22], and perform ensemble modeling
task-specific training data is made available.
with a mixture of LSTM-based LMs [23]. More recently, an
approach analogous to [23] was explored in [24], which A bit more terminology: for the masked language model
replaced LSTM with vanilla Transformer for bidirectionally task conducted at the pre-training stage, given a token (e.g.,
contextual modeling. word) sequence 𝐱=[𝑥 ,…,𝑥 ], BERT constructs 𝐱* by
% (
randomly replacing a proper portion of tokens in 𝐱 with a
Although the aforementioned LM methods performs well
special symbol [MASK] for each of them, and designates the
in ASR N-best hypothesis reranking, their objectives of
masked tokens collectively be 𝐱+ . Let 𝐻 denotes a
model training are all centered around next word prediction -
Transformer which maps a length-T token sequence x into a
(namely, reading a list of words sequentially and predict an
sequence of hidden vectors 𝐻 (𝐱)=[𝐻 (𝐱) ,𝐻 (𝐱)
upcoming word at each time stamp) but are not closely linked - - % - 0
… ,𝐻 (𝐱) ], then the pre-training objective function of
to the reranking accuracy optimization. In this light, a - (
BERT can be expressed by [12][27]
discriminative modeling framework for N-best hypothesis
reranking was proposed in [25], which consists of an LSTM- (
based encoder network followed by a binary classification maxlog 𝑃 (𝐱+|𝐱*,𝜃)≈@𝑚 log𝑃 (𝑥 |𝐱*,𝜃) (1)
9:;< B 9:;< B
-
network built on a fully-connected feedforward neural
BC%
network (FNN).
PLL Score
Σ log
BERT
is
useful
FNN + softmax
Trm Trm Trm Trm
BERT
Trm Trm Trm Trm
[CLS] [SEP]
[MASK] is useful
BERT [MASK] useful
BERT is [MASK]
Figure 2: A schematic depiction of TPBERT for ASR N-
best hypothesis reranking. Figure 3: A schematic depiction of MBERT for ASR N-
best hypothesis reranking.
where 𝑚
B
is an indicator of whether the token at position 𝑡 is
masked or not. Table 1: Basic Statistics of the AMI Corpus.
3.2. BERT for ASR N-best Hypothesis Reranking Training Set Development Set Evaluation Set
Hours 78 8.71 8.97
In this paper, we explore a novel use of BERT in the context
# Utterances 108,104 13,059 12,612
of ASR N-best hypothesis reranking (denoted by PBERT),
which the purpose of predicting a hypothesis that would have
the lowest WER from an ASR N-best hypothesis list. More
3.3. Incorporation of Task-specific Topic Information
specifically, PBERT consists of two model components,
into PBERT
namely BERT stacked with an additional fully-connected
feedforward neural network (FNN), as depicted in Figure 1.
To make the proposed PBERT more task-aware, we seek to
For the list of N-best hypotheses that is fed into the BERT
add an additional model component to PBERT to empower it
component, we add [CLS] at the beginning of each
to further capture task-specific topic characteristics of N-best
hypothesis (regarded as a sentence here) and [SEP] at the end
hypotheses, apart from the both short- and long-span word-
of the hypothesis. In addition, as with the seminal paper of
level contextual interaction relations that has been already
BERT, words involved in each hypothesis will be
encoded by the BERT component. To this end, we employ
additionally encoded with a position vector to indicate their
probabilistic latent topic analysis (PLSA) [28], a celebrated
positions in the hypothesis, as well as a segment vector to
unsupervised topic modeling method, to extract hypothesis-
indicate the change of hypotheses if needed. The intermediate
level topic representation pertaining to the ASR task of
goal of PBERT is to use each respective [CLS] vector output
interest. In more precise terms, PLSA is first trained in an
from the last layer of the BERT component as the semantic
unsupervised manner with the transcripts of the training
representation of a hypothesis, while all of these [CLS]
utterances so as to globally estimate a set of latent topic
vectors will be then fed in parallel into the FNN component
distributions that are relevant to the ASR task of interest. At
to output a prediction score (with the softmax normalization)
test time, the task-specific topic representation of each
for each hypothesis. Given a set of training utterances, each
hypothesis can be obtained through a simple folding-in
of which is equipped with an N-best hypothesis list generated
process with the set of PLSA-based latent topic distributions
by ASR and the indication of the oracle hypothesis that has
estimated beforehand. Thereafter, we refer to this enhanced
the lowest WER, we can train the FNN component and fin-
modeling method of PBERT as TPBERT, whose model
tune the BERT component as well.
structure is schematically depicted in Figure 2. Our TPBERT
As a side note, the acoustic model score, language model bears some resemblance to a recently proposed BERT-based
score or their combination score for each hypothesis, model for semantic similarity detection [29].
obtained from ASR, can be concatenated together with the
We remark here that there have been some very recent
corresponding [CLS] vector of the hypothesis for feature
studies that applied a vanilla BERT-based LM pretrained on
augmentation.
a large dataset to score a sentence in terms of the so-called
pseudo-log-likelihood (PLL) score, which can be in turn used
in conjunction with other scores or embeddings to perform
reranking of the N-best hypotheses generated by machine
Table 2: The WER results obtained by the proposed
translation (MT) or ASR [30][31]. The PLL score of a given
PBERT and TPBERT N-best reranking methods in
sentence (or hypothesis) 𝐱=[𝑥 ,…,𝑥 ] is defined by
% ( comparison to that of the LSTM- and BLSTM-based
reranking methods.
PLL(𝐱)=∑( log𝑃 (𝑥 |𝐱 ,𝜃 ) (2)
BC% 9:;< B \IJ
Method WER (%)
where 𝐱 denotes the input sentence 𝐱 that has its word at Baseline ASR 22.79
time
sta\ mIJ
p 𝑡 be replaced with the special symbol [MASK]. LSTM 21.33
We denote such a BERT-based scoring method as MBERT, BLSTM 20.98
which will be compared to our methods for ASR N-best PBERT(I) 21.27
hypothesis reranking in the next section. PBERT(II) 21.69
TPBERT(I) 20.49
4. EMPIRICAL EXPERIMENTS
TPBERT(II) 21.02
4.1. Experimental setup
Table 3: The WER results obtained by variants of the
We evaluate our proposed approach on the AMI meeting MBERT N-best reranking method.
transcription database and task [32], while all experiments are
Method WER (%)
conducted using Kaldi toolkit [33]. For the AMI database, the
MBERT(A) 20.88
speech corpus consisted of utterances collected with the
individual headset microphones (IHM), while a MBERT(B) 20.98
pronunciation lexicon of 50K words was used. Table 1 shows MBERT(C) 20.98
some basic statistics of the AMI corpus for our experiments.
The ASR system employed in this paper was built on the
hybrid DNN-HMM paradigm. For acoustic modeling, our in Table 2, where the WER result of the baseline ASR system
recipe was to first estimate a GMM-HMM acoustic model on is listed for reference. Inspection of Table 2 reveals three
the training utterances with their corresponding orthographic noteworthy points. First, PBERT(I) seems to perform at the
transcripts, and in turn used the prior distribution of the same level as the LSTM, but does not compete with BLSTM.
senones obtained from the GMM components, in conjunction Second, TPBERT(I) stands out in performance, leading to a
with the LF-MMI training objective, to estimate the time- relative WER reduction of 2.3% over BLSTM. This also
delay neural network (TDNN) acoustic model [34], which validates the utility of additional incorporation of task-
was taken as the seed model. The speech feature vectors were specific topic into PBERT. Third, Setting (II), which
40 MFCC coefficients extracted from frames of 25 msec disentangles the ASR decoding score into the acoustic model
length and 10 msec shift, spliced with 100-dimensional i- and language model probability scores, appears to worsen the
vectors for speaker adaptation of TDNN. On the other hand, performance when compared Setting (I).
the language model of the baseline ASR system was a trigram
language model, which was trained on the transcripts of the In the second set of experiments, we evaluate the
AMI training utterances with Kneser-Ney (KN) [5] performance of the recently proposed MBERT method [30]
smoothing. [31], so as to further confirm the superiority of our proposed
TPBERT method. Note again here that, MBERT treats the
4.2. Experimental Results vanilla BERT as a masked language model to calculate the
PLL score of each hypothesis (cf. Section 3.3). Our
In the first set of experiments, we assess the effectiveness of implementation of MBERT follows the model configuration
our proposed PBERT and TPBERT methods for ASR N-best proposed by [31], with three different training settings: in
reranking with two different settings, in comparison to the Setting (A), MBERT simply makes use a publicly-available
conventional LSTM and bidirectional-LSTM methods BERT model that were pretrained on 3.3-billion word tokens
(denoted by LSTM and BLSTM for short, respectively) [12]; in Setting (B), the BERT model of Setting (A) is further
[15][16]. In Setting (I), we augment the embedding of each fine-tuned with the ground-truth (reference) transcripts of
hypothesis with the ASR decoding score (a log-liner training utterances; and in Setting (C), the BERT model of
combination of the acoustic model and language model Setting (A) is further fine-tuned with the oracle hypotheses of
probability scores). In Setting (II), we first disentangle the training utterances. Three observations can be drawn from
decoding score into acoustic model probability score and Table 3. First, MBERT(A) delivers a worse WER result than
language model probability score, and then augment the TPBERT(I) and performs slightly better than BLSTM.
embedding of each hypothesis with these two scores as two Second, MBERT(B) and MBERT(C) yield the same WER
additional dimensions. The corresponding results are shown result, being on par with BLSTM. Third, fine-tuning of the
BERT model bring no benefit to BERT. The above [5] R. Kneser and H. Ney, “Improved backing-off for m-gram
observations do verify the efficacy of TPBERT, which language modeling,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
frames the ASR N-best rescoring as a prediction problem Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pp. 181-184, 1995.
rather than a language model rescoring problem, such as
MBERT that exploits the PLL scores. [6] S. F. Chen and J. Goodman, “An empirical study of smoothing
techniques for language modeling,” Computer Speech &
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK Language, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 359–394, 1999.
[7] J. T. Goodman, “A bit of progress in language modeling,”
In this paper, we have presented a novel and effective BERT- Computer Speech & Language, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 403–434,
based method, namely TPBERT, for ASR N-best hypothesis 2001.
reranking, which can additionally leverage task-specific topic
[8] T. Mikolov, M. Karafiat, L. Burget, F. ´ Cernock ˇ y, and S.
information clues to assist the BERT model component in
Khu- ` danpur, “Recurrent neural network based language
achieving better embeddings of N-best hypotheses. A series
model,” in Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
of empirical evaluations on a benchmark meeting International Speech Communication Association
transcription task indeed demonstrate the utility of TPBERT (Interspeech), 2010.
in comparison to some top-of-the-line methods. As to future
[9] Toma´s Mikolov, Stefan Kombrink, Luk ˇ a´s Burget, Jan ˇ
work, we envisage to explore more sophisticated techniques
Cernock ˇ y, and ` Sanjeev Khudanpur, “Extensions of recurrent
for task-specific topic or knowledge modeling that can be
neural network language model,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
tightly coupled with our method for use in ASR N-best
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
hypothesis reranking, document ranking for spoken Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5528–5531, 2011.
document retrieval, and among others [27][35]. We also plan
[10] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,”
to optimize the model components of our method with some
Neural Computing, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
feasible discriminative training criteria [36][37].
[11] M. Sundermeyer, R. Schluter, and H. Ney, “LSTM neural
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENT networks for language modeling,” in Proceedings of the
Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association (Interspeech), 2012.
This research is supported in part by the Ministry of Science
and Technology (MOST), Taiwan, under Grant Number [12] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. “BERT:
MOST 109-2634-F-008-006- through Pervasive Artificial Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
Intelligence Research (PAIR) Labs, Taiwan, and Grant understanding. In in Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Numbers MOST 108-2221-E-003-005-MY3 and MOST 109-
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
2221-E-003- 020-MY3. Any findings and implications in the
(NAACL-HLT), 2019.
paper do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsors.
[13] P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang, “Squad:
7. REFERENCES 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text,” arXiv
preprint, arXiv:1606.05250, 2016.
[1] G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. E. Dahl, A.-R. Mohamed, N. [14] C.-W. Huang and Y.-N. Chen, “Learning ASR-robust
Jaitly, A. Senior, V. Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, T.N. Sainath, and contextualized embeddings for spoken language
B. Kingsbury, “Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in understanding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
speech recognition: The shared views of four research groups,” Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 82–97, (ICASSP), 2020.
2012.
[15] E. Arisoy, A. Sethy, B. Ramabhadran, and S. Chen,
[2] D. Yu and L. Deng, Automatic speech recognition: A deep “Bidirectional recurrent neural network language models for
learning approach, Springer-Verlag: London, 2015. automatic speech recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
[3] J. Li, L. Deng, Y. Gong, and R. Haeb-Umbach, “An overview
Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5421–5425, 2015.
of noise-robust automatic speech recognition,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. [16] X. Chen, A. Ragni, X. Liu, and M. Gales, “Investigating
22, no. 4, pp. 745–777, 2014. bidirectional recurrent neural network language models for
speech recognition.,” in Proc. ICSA INTERSPEECH, 2017.
[4] T. Hori, S. Araki, T. Yoshioka, M. Fujimoto, S. Watanabe, T.
Oba, A. Ogawa, K. Otsuka, D. Mikami, K. Kinoshita, T. [17] Mittul Singh, Youssef Oualil, and Dietrich Klakow,
Nakatani, A. Nakamura, and J. Yamato, “Low-latency real- “Approximated and domain-adapted lstm language models for
time meeting recognition and understanding using distant first-pass decoding in speech recognition.,” in Proceedings of
microphones and omni-directional camera,” IEEE Transactions the Annual Conference of the International Speech
on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. Communication Association (Interspeech), 2017.
499–513, 2012.
[18] K. Li, H. Xu, Y. Wang, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Recurrent
neural network language model adaptation for conversational
speech recognition.,” in Proceedings of the Annual Conference [31] J. Salazar, D. Liang, T. Q Nguyen, and K. Kirchhoff, “Masked
of the International Speech Communication Association language model scoring,” in Proceedings of the Annual
(Interspeech), 2018. Conference of the International Speech Communication
Association (ACL), pp. 2699–2712, 2020.
[19] Tomas Mikolov and Geoffrey Zweig, “Context dependent
recurrent neural network language model,” in Proceedings of [32] J. Carletta, S. Ashby, and S. Bourban et al., “The AMI meeting
the IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), 2012. corpus: A pre-announcement,” in Proceedings of the
International Workshop on Machine Learning for Multimodal
[20] X. Chen, T. Tan, X. Liu, P. Lanchantin, M. Wan, M. Gales, and
Interaction, pp. 28–39, 2005.
P. C. Woodland, “Recurrent neural network language model
adaptation for multi-genre broadcast speech recognition,” in [33] D. Povey, A. Ghoshal, G. Boulianne, L. Burget, O. Glembek,
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International N. Goel, M. Hannemann, P. Motlicek, Y. Qian, P. Schwarz, J.
Speech Communication Association (Interspeech), 2015. Silovsky, G. Stemmer, and K. Vesely. The Kaldi Speech
Recognition Toolkit. in Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on
[21] M. Ma, M. Nirschl, F. Biadsy, and S. Kumar, “Approaches for
Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding (ASRU),
neural-network language model adaptation.,” in Proceedings of
2011.
the Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association (Interspeech), 2017. [34] D. Povey, V. Peddinti, D. Galvez, P. Ghahrmani, V. Manohar,
X. Na, Y. Wang, S. Khudanpur, “Purely sequence-trained
[22] M. W. Y. Lam, X. Chen, S. Hu, J. Yu, X. Liu, and H. Meng,
neural networks for ASR Based on Lattice-Free MMI,” in
“Gaussian process LSTM recurrent neural network language
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International
models for speech recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Speech Communication Association (Interspeech), 2016
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), pp. 7235–7239, 2019. [35] S.-H. Liu, K.-Y. Chen, B. Chen, “Enhanced language modeling
with proximity and sentence relatedness information for
[23] K. Irie, S. Kumar, M. Nirschl, and H. Liao, “RADMM:
extractive broadcast news summarization," ACM Transactions
Recurrent adaptive mixture model with applications to domain
on Asian and Low-Resource Language Information Processing,
robust language modeling,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
vol. 19, no. 3, Article 46: 1-19, 2020.
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2018. [36] Y. Tachioka and S. Watanabe, “A discriminative method for
recurrent neural network language models,” in Proceedings of
[24] K. Li, Z. Liu, T. He, H. Huang, F. Peng, D. Povey, S. Khudanpur,
the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
“An Empirical Study of Transformer-Based Neural Language
Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5386–5389, 2015.
Model Adaptation” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing [37] T. Hori, C. Hori, S. Watanabe, and J. R. Hershey, “Minimum
(ICASSP), 2020. word error training of long short-term memory recurrent neural
network language models for speech recognition,” in
[25] A. Ogawa, M. Delcroix, S. Karita, and T. Nakatani, “Rescoring
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
N-best speech recognition list based on one-on-one hypothesis
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 5990–
comparison using encoder-classifier model,” in Proceedings of
5994, 2016.
the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6099–6103, 2018.
[26] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.
N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you
need,” Proceedings of the International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 6000–6010, 2017.
[27] S. W. Fan-Jiang, T. H. Lo, B.Chen, “Spoken document retrieval
leveraging BERT-based modeling and query reformulation,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2020.
[28] T. Hoffmann, “Unsupervised Learning by Probabilistic Latent
Semantic Analysis,” Machine Learning, vol. 42, pp. 177–196,
2001.
[29] N.Peinelt, D. Nguyen, and M. Liakata, “tBERT: Topic models
and BERT joining forces for semantic similarity detection,” in
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association (ACL), pp. 7047–7055,
2020.
[30] J. Shin, Y. Lee, and K. Jung, “Effective sentence scoring
method using BERT for speech recognition,” in Proceedings of
The Asian Conference on Machine Learning (ACML), pp.
1081–1093, 2019.