Investigation of BERT Model on Biomedical
Relation Extraction Based on Revised Fine-tuning
Mechanism
Peng Su K. Vijay-Shanker
Department of Computer and Information Science Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Delaware University of Delaware
Newark, Delaware, USA Newark, Delaware, USA
psu@udel.edu vijay@udel.edu
Abstract—With the explosive growth of biomedical literature, [7], a language representation model based on bidirectional
designing automatic tools to extract information from the lit- Transformer [9], to solve the relation extraction problem. In
erature has great significance in biomedical research. Recently,
the pre-training stage, BERT learns general language repre-
transformer-based BERT models adapted to the biomedical
sentation for both the words and the text sequence through
domain have produced leading results. However, all the existing
BERT models for relation classification only utilize partial two unsupervised tasks. This task-agnostic representation is
knowledge from the last layer. In this paper, we will investigate applied for the specific tasks via supervised learning on task-
themethodofutilizingtheentirelayerinthefine-tuningprocess specific datasets in the fine-tuning stage.
ofBERTmodel.Tothebestofourknowledge,wearethefirstto
Since the development of BERT [7], previous works on re-
explore thismethod. The experimental results illustratethat our
lationextractionandotherclassificationtaskshaveallutilized
methodimprovestheBERTmodelperformanceandoutperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on three benchmark datasets for the suggested approach of using a special token called the
different relation extraction tasks. In addition, further analysis classification token (CLS) in the topmost layer. Thus, during
indicates that the key knowledge about the relations can be fine-tuning for classification tasks, all information is funneled
learned from the last layer of BERT model.
through a part of the top layer during back-propagation. In
IndexTerms—DeepLearning,BERT,Transformer,Biomedical
this work, we will explore the potential of utilizing all the
Text Mining, Relation Extraction
information in the last layer to improve model performance
on relation extraction tasks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Our work is partly driven by an observation in [10], where
In the past few decades, biomedical literature has been the nature of information represented in various layers was
growing explosively and its interdisciplinary nature makes studied. The authors found that BERT models appeared to
biomedical text mining a unique part of modern biomedical mimic traditional NLP approaches where low-level morpho-
research. Among text mining tasks, relation extraction (RE) logical and syntactic aspects are represented in lower layers
plays a crucial role in extracting the structure of the text. The andhigherlevelandmoresemanticnatureoftextislearnedin
task of relation extraction in biomedical domain is to identify higher layers of BERT model. Since relation extraction task
semantic relationships between biomedical entities mentioned is clearly semantic in nature, we hypothesize that important
in the text. For example, protein-protein interaction is a RE information for this task will reside in top layers of the
taskthatinvolvestheextractionoftheinteractingproteinsfrom BERT model. We therefore wish to investigate whether all
the literature. RE allows information available in unstructured the information in the top layer of the BERT model could be
form in the literature to be stored in a structured form that fruitfully used to improve the performance of RE models.
can be used in many downstream applications like database To test our hypothesis, we employ two different methods
curation, question answering system, text summarization etc. to summarize the information in the last layer: Long Short
Many different methods have been proposed to solve the Term Memory (LSTM) model [11] and attention mechanism
RE problem [1]–[4]. Recently, utilizing neural pre-trained [12], and then include the summarized knowledge in a new
language models has been shown to be an effective way to fine-tuning process. We test these methods on three widely
improve model performance of natural language processing studied RE tasks in biomedical domain: the protein-protein
(NLP) tasks including RE [5]–[8]. These methods can make interaction (PPI) [13], the drug-drug interaction (DDI) [14],
best use of a large amount of unlabeled data in an unsu- and the chemical-protein interaction (ChemProt) [15]. Our
pervised pre-training phase to build language representation. results show that utilizing all the information from the last
Thisphasecanbefollowedbysupervisedfine-tuningontask- layer boosts the model performance on all three tasks and
specific datasets. In this work, we will employ the BERT furthermore,wenowachievethestate-of-the-artresultsonthe
0202
voN
1
]LC.sc[
1v89300.1102:viXra
three benchmark datasets. problem and ignore other outputs, which contains useful in-
The rest of this manuscript is organized as follows. We formation. In the work [27], the authors explored the methods
discuss some related works and background in Section 2. ofextractingknowledgefromtheintermediatelayersinBERT
In Section 3, we describe the details of methodology and and demonstrated the advancement on aspect based sentiment
experimental settings, followed by the evaluation results and analysis and natural language inference tasks. Since residual
discussion in Section 4. We conclude in the last section. connections are employed in the Transformer, all important
informationinintermediatelayersshouldbetransmittedtothe
II. RELATEDWORKANDBACKGROUND
last layer of BERT model during training. We will compare
Wefirstpresentsomerelatedworksinthissection.Thenwe this method with our approach of utilizing all the information
brieflyintroduceBERTmodel,itspre-trainingandfine-tuning from the last layer in BERT model.
process. In addition, the work [10] found that the BERT model
represents the steps of the traditional NLP pipeline in a
A. Related Work
sequential way, which means the BERT model captures the
Extracting various of relations in BioNLP domain has linguisticinformationinthesequenceofpart-of-speech(POS)
attracted considerable attentions in recent years with deep tagging, parsing, NER (Named Entity Recognition), semantic
learning methods and high-quality word representation (word roles,thencoreference.Theirexperimentsalsoshowedthatthe
embedding)showingadvancements inperformance[16]–[18]. representation for relation classification continues to improve
Both convolutional neural networks (CNN) and recurrent up to the highest layer of the BERT model, indicating that
neural networks (RNN) [3], [19], [20] have achieved notable the last layer contains important information for the relation
results on relation extraction tasks based on word embedding extraction tasks.
in this field before the emerging of utilizing language model. Our method evaluation will be conducted on three relation
An advantage of language model methods is that they extraction tasks: PPI [13], DDI [14], and ChemProt [15].
can leverage a large amount of unlabeled data to learn the For PPI, it is probably the most widely studied relation
context-dependent and universal language representation. The extraction task in biomedical domain because its key role
pre-trained language model can be applied on downstream in understanding biological processes. Extracting relation of
tasks through fine-tuning and many language models have DDIwillhelppreventadverseeffectsfromdrugcombinations.
been proposed such as ELMo [6], GPT [21] and BERT [7]. ChemProt relation extraction will benefit precision medicine
Peters et al. proposed a contextualized word representation byfindingtheaffectedproteinsbyaspecificchemical.Dozens
from a pre-trained language model (ELMo) and significantly ofsystemshavebeendesignedforthesetaskslikerule/kernel-
improvedtheperformanceonsixtasksofquestionanswering, based methods [28]–[30], neural network methods [3], [31],
textual entailment and sentiment analysis [6]. The Generative [32], language representation model methods [22], [24]. As
Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) [21] was based on a uni- far as we know, the state-of-the-art system on AIMed corpus
directional language model and has shown its effectiveness for PPI task is based on deep residual convolutional neural
on benchmarks for natural language understanding. BERT network[3]whilethebestresultsonDDIandChemProttasks
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) are obtained using the BERT model [22], [24].
model [7] was designed to learn language representation in
B. Background
bidirectional way and was demonstrated to obtain state-of-
the-art performance on tasks such as question answering and BERT [7] is a bidirectional Transformer model [9] for
language inference. language representation. Using a ”masked language model”,
Usually, pre-trained BERT model for general domain gen- BERT is able to learn bidirectional representation (both left
eralizes poorly in a specific domain like biomedical domain. and right context) of a word. The application of BERT usu-
In order to facilitate the biomedical research, several BERT ally includes two steps: utilizing pre-training to gain general
models have been adapted for the biomedical domain such as knowledge and employing fine-tuning to acquire task-specific
BioBERT[22],SciBERT[23],BlueBERT[24].Thesemodels knowledge of a task.
are pre-trained on different types of biomedical corpora and Pre-training of BERT: BERT is pre-trained using two
have been shown to achieve state-of-the-art results on various unsupervised tasks: masked language model (MLM) and next
biomedical tasks. BioBERT [22] was pre-trained on PubMed sentenceprediction(NSP).Thepre-trainingprocedureusually
abstracts and PMC full-length articles, BlueBERT [24] used involves a large amount of unlabeled data. Originally, BERT
PubMedabstractandMIMIC-IIIclinicalnotes[25]asthepre- was designed for general purpose and it was pretrained on
training data, and a sample of 1.14M papers from Semantic English Wikipedia and BooksCorpus. However, each domain
Scholar [26] were used in SciBERT model [23]. In this work, has its specific knowledge and sometime it is impossible for
we will first select the best BERT model on our relation the general BERT to gain such knowledge. For example, in
extraction tasks and then employ that model in the following biomedical domain, the biomedical entity names can not be
experiments. represented well based on the general BERT model since its
However, most of previous works only use the output of pre-training corpora are short of such names. In this paper,
classification token ([CLS]) in BERT model for classification we will consider three BERT models that are adapted to
B. New fine-tuning process of BERT model
As mentioned above, a BERT model for classification
problem is usually based on the [CLS] token of the last layer
and other outputs of the last layer are abandoned. So this
method might discard some useful information from the last
layer. The [CLS] token is used to predict the next sentence
(NSPtask)duringthepre-training,whichusuallyinvolvestwo
or more sentences, but the input of our relation extraction
tasks only contain one sentence. This indicates that the [CLS]
output might ignore important information about the entities
and their interaction because it is not trained to capture this
kind of information. The fine-tuning step on task-specific
datasets compensates this information loss on relations to a
certainextent,bututilizingallinformationmightyieldabetter
representation than the use of partial information (only the
Fig. 1: Original BERT model architecture on relation extrac-
[CLS]output).Asitisalsoshownin[10],higherlayeroutputs
tion.
yield better representations for the relation classification task.
In this paper, we will design a mechanism to utilize all the
information in the last layer during the fine-tuning of BERT
the biomedical domain (BioBERT [22], SciBERT [23] and
model.
BlueBERT [24]) and select the best one for the experiments
To include the information from other outputs of the last
on the new fine-tuning process.
layer, we propose to add an new module to summarize these
Fine-tuningofBERT:Thepre-trainedBERTmodelcanbe
outputsandthenconcatenatethesummarizedinformationwith
fine-tunedforvariousdownstreamtasks.Givenatask,wejust
the[CLS]outputastheextrastepforfine-tuning.Specifically,
need toappend an additionaloutput layeron top ofthe BERT
we explore two methods of summarizing the information in
output and then feed the task-specific inputs and outputs into
the last layer: Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) model and
BERT model and fine-tune the BERT parameters like regular
attention mechanism. The model architectures of these two
model training. For classification problems, a classifier can be
methods are illustrated in Fig 2.
built by putting a Softmax layer on the [CLS] token output
Formally, given the hidden states (with dimension of H) of
of pre-trained BERT model. The [CLS] token is designed
the last layer (L-th layer)
for classification purpose in BERT model and every input
sequence will always start with this special token. The model hL ={hL , hL, hL, ..., hL, hL },
all CLS 1 2 N SEP
architecture of fine-tuning based on [CLS] token is shown in
only hL is used for classification in the original BERT
Fig 1. CLS
model. Here we will try to add the summarized infor-
III. METHODOLOGY mation from the sequence of other outputs, a.k.a., hL =
{hL, hL, ..., hL} (We ignore hL since it is a separation
In this section, we first define the relation extraction prob- 1 2 N SEP
tokenfordifferentsentences)andtwodifferentapproachesare
lem.Then,weproposethemethodofaddinganewmoduleto
employed: LSTM sequence model and attention mechanism.
summarizetheoutputinformationinthelastlayerduringfine-
1) A natural idea to model the sequence of the last layer
tuning. The evaluation datasets and metrics, the fine-tuning
is to use recurrent neural network and LSTM model is
parameters and pre-processing of data for BERT model are
our first choice since its advantages on long sequence.
also given in this section.
The output of last LSTM cell will be seen as the
A. Relation extraction representation of our sequence. Formally,
Relation extraction task can be seen as a classification O =LSTM(hL) i=1,...,N
i
problem. For example, for the DDI relation extraction task,
a sentence instance with two marked drug mentions is con- 2) Another choice of summarizing sequence data is the at-
sidered one of the four relations (ADVICE, EFFECT, INT, tention mechanism. Specifically, we can utilize additive
MECHANISM) if the sentence expresses drug interaction attentiontocombinethesequencebyassigningaweight
between the two drug occurrences, otherwise it will be seen for each output.
as negative. Formally, for a relation R and its label set L, [α ]=softmax(hLK)
i
our model needs to predict the probability of each label
P(L|Tok 1, Tok 2, ...,Tok n,Et 1,Et 2)basedonthesentence
O
=(cid:88)N
α hL
text S = Tok Tok ...Tok and two entities Et , Et in i i
1 2 n 1 2
the sentence. BERT model can be applied on this relation i=1
extraction classification problem. where KH×1 are learnable parameters.
(a) LSTM on the last layer (b) Attention mechanism on the last layer
Fig. 2: Model architectures of including all outputs in the last layer.
Corpus Instance#(Total) Train Dev Test is no standard training and test set for this dataset, we will
PPI(AIMed) 5,834 - - -
employ 10-fold cross-validation on it.
DDI 48,223 19,460 11,820 16,943
ChemProt 31,784 18,779 7,244 5,761 The corpus for ChemProt task contains a training set of
1,020 abstracts, a development set of 612 abstracts and a test
TABLE I: Statistics of datasets for PPI, DDI and ChemProt.
set of 800 abstracts from PubMed [15]. We will use the stan-
dard training and test set to evaluate the model performance.
For the DDI corpus, it has 792 documents from DrugBank
We then concatenate the output of LSTM/attention mech-
database and 233 abstracts from Medline [14]. Similar to
anism with the [CLS] output to form the final representation
ChemProt, we will use the standard split of this dataset for
of our input
evaluation (624 documents for training, 210 for development
h=[hL ;O].
CLS and 191 for test).
Finally, we feed this representation to a softmax layer to As for the evaluation metrics, PPI is a binary classifi-
predict the label: cation problem, so we will use precision, recall and F1-
score to measure the performance of the models. However,
p=softmax(W fh+b f) the ChemProt and DDI tasks are multi-class classification
problem. The ChemProt corpus is labeled with six classes:
where WC×H, bC×1 are also learnable parameters and C is
f f CPR:3 (upregulator, activator, indirect upregulator), CPR:4
the number of classes (categories) in the classification task.
(downregulator,inhibitor,indirect downregulator),CPR:5(ag-
Meanwhile, the contribution of [CLS] token for the clas-
onist,agonist-activator,agonist-inhibitor),CPR:6(antagonist),
sification task needs to be explored. So we experiment with
CPR:9 (substrate, product of, substrate product of) and neg-
another fine-tuning process without [CLS] token. Formally,
ative. In DDI corpus, there are five labels for the instances:
we only take h = [O] as the final representation of the input
ADVICE, EFFECT, INT, MECHANISM and negative. For
and utilize the same softmax layer p=softmax(W h+b )
f f ChemProt and DDI tasks, we evaluate the model utilizing
for prediction. The performance of these two new fine-tuning
micro(i.e.,withweightedmean)precision,recallandF1score
processes can shed light on the roles of the two parts (the
onthenon-negativeclassesasotherpeoplereporttheirresults
[CLS] token and sentence outputs) of the last layer for
in the same way.
classification problem.
D. Fine-tuning hyper-parameters
C. Datasets and evaluation metrics
Duringthefine-tuningofthemodels,weuselearningrateof
To measure the effectiveness of the new fine-tuning mecha-
2e-5,batchsizeof32,trainingepochof10andmaxsequence
nism, we will evaluate it on three benchmark datasets. Table I
length of 128.
shows the statistics of these datasets. For PPI task, we will
utilize the most well-known PPI relation corpus: AIMed [33].
E. Data pre-processing
It is obtained by annotating 750 abstracts from Medline and
it contains 1,000 positive (interacting protein pairs) and 4,834 In relation extraction tasks, the input for the BERT model
negative (non-interacting protein pairs) instances. Since there contains two parts: the text and the entities in it. In order for
Task Label Sentenceexamples
Positive Wehavecharacterizedthephysicalandfunctionalinteractionsbetween@PROTEIN$and@PROTEIN$.
PPI
Negative pRB,@PROTEIN$,@PROTEIN$(INK4d)andp27(KIP1)decreaseinbothcelltypes.
MECHANISM @DRUG$decreasestheeliminationof@DRUG$causinganincreaseinoverallexposure.
DDI
EFFECT Anticoagulants@DRUG$mayincreasesensitivitytooral@DRUG$.
CPR:4 @CHEMICAL$potentlyattenuatedgeneexpressionsinvolvedininflammation,suchasiNOS,COX-2and@GENE$.
ChemProt TheysuggestthatTRPML1worksinconcertwith@CHEMICAL$toregulate@GENE$translocationbetween
CPR:9
thecytoplasmandlysosomes.
TABLE II: Examples after pre-processing from the three tasks.
PPI DDI ChemProt
Model
Precision Recall F1Score Precision Recall F1Score Precision Recall F1Score
SOTA 79.0 76.8 77.6 79.3 80.5 79.9 77.0 75.9 76.5
BioBERT 79.0 83.3 81.0 77.4 79.4 78.4 74.6 76.8 75.7
BioBERT+LSTM LL 80.2 84.0 82.0 79.4 78.0 78.7 75.7 77.4 76.5
BioBERT+Att LL 80.7 84.4 82.5 81.3 80.1 80.7 76.5 77.1 76.8
TABLE III: Model performance on PPI, DDI and ChemProt tasks. SOTA: state-of-the-art results for each
task; BioBERT+LSTM LL: model of applying LSTM on the outputs of last layer; BioBERT+Att LL:
model of applying attention mechanism on the outputs of last layer. To the best of our knowledge, the
state-of-the-art systems on the three tasks are: [3] for PPI; [22] for ChemProt; [24] for DDI.
BERT model to recognize the entities in the sentence, we fol- in the first two rows of Table III. As shown in the table, the
lowthestandardpre-processingwayforrelationextractionby BioBERT model outperforms the state-of-the-art method on
replacingtheseentitynameswithpredefinedtags.Specifically, PPItask,butitisnotuptoparwiththecurrentSOTAmethods
we replace all the protein names with @PROTEIN$, drug on DDI and ChemProt tasks.
names with @DRUG$, and chemical names with @CHEM- In the last two rows of Table III, the model performance of
ICAL$. In Table II, we show some examples from the three includingtheknowledgeofthelastlayerisillustrated.Clearly,
tasks, in which the entities are replaced with the special tags. the use of information in the last layer leads to improvement
In order to alleviate the out-of-vocabulary problem, BERT forallthreetasks.Themodelofutilizingattentionmechanism
uses WordPiece embedding [34] and each input word will be on the last layer achieves the best performance on all the
split into subwords from WordPiece vocabulary. In addition, tasks, with 1.5%, 2.3% and 1.1% F1 score improvement on
following the original BERT input representation, we add PPI, DDI and ChemProt respectively. We also see that the
the segment and position information of the tokens in the use of attention mechanism outperforms the LSTM method
input sentence through the segment embedding and position on summarizing the information of last layer.
embedding. Furthermore, we achieve the state-of-the-art performance
on all three tasks after adding the attention mechanism on
IV. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION
the last layer. Specifically, our method leads to 4.9%, 0.8%
Inthissection,wefirstdiscussthemodelselectionfromthe and 0.3% F1 score improvement on PPI, DDI and ChemProt
threeBERTmodelsforbiomedicaldomain.Next,theresultsof respectively.
newfine-tuningprocessareprovided.Atlast,morediscussions
onattentionweightsaregiventohelpusbetterunderstandthe
B. Other fine-tuning mechanisms
information summarization in attention mechanism.
Asmentionedearlier,therearethreeadaptedBERTmodels Theresultsofnewfine-tuningofBERTmodelthatincludes
for biomedical domain: BioBERT, SciBERT and BlueBERT. outputinformationfromboth[CLS]tokenandtheothertokens
The difference between the three models adapted to the of the last layer have shown that this method achieves better
biomedical domain is the text used for the pre-training. Af- performance than original fine-tuning mechanism. In this
ter fine-tuning on the corpora of the three tasks, BioBERT work,wealsoexperimentwiththemethodoffine-tuningwith-
generally obtains good results (Please refer to Table VI in out[CLS]outputtoexplorethecontributionof[CLS]token.In
the Appendix for the details of the performance of the three Table IV, the two rows in the middle (BioBERT+LSTM LL*
models). Therefore, we will report our experimental results of and BioBERT+Att LL*) illustrate the model performance of
new fine-tuning process based on BioBERT. utilizing the outputs of last layer without [CLS] token. The
first two rows are only repetitions of the results from Table
A. Model performance after utilizing all the information from
III and provide the context for the new results. We can see
the last layer
thatthefine-tuningwithout[CLS]achievesbetterperformance
To provides context for the performance of the proposed with small margin on PPI task, but it lags behind the previous
method, we first report the state-of-the-art (SOTA) results and methods on the other two tasks. The results indicate that the
theperformanceoforiginalBioBERTmodelonthethreetasks [CLS] token contains key information for our classification
PPI DDI ChemProt
Model
Precision Recall F1Score Precision Recall F1Score Precision Recall F1Score
BioBERT 79.0 83.3 81.0 77.4 79.4 78.4 74.6 76.8 75.7
BioBERT+Att LL 80.7 84.4 82.5 81.3 80.1 80.7 76.5 77.1 76.8
BioBERT+LSTM LL* 79.6 82.0 80.8 79.7 76.5 78.1 75.7 74.5 75.1
BioBERT+Att LL* 82.3 83.5 82.8 79.7 77.6 78.6 76.4 74.5 75.4
BioBERT+LSTM CLS[27] 79.0 82.3 80.6 77.6 80.4 79.0 73.8 76.4 75.1
BioBERT+Att CLS[27] 79.9 83.6 81.7 78.6 77.8 78.2 73.2 75.3 74.2
TABLE IV: Model performance without [CLS] token and utilizing [CLS] from intermedi-
ate layers. BioBERT+LSTM LL*/BioBERT+Att LL*: models of fine-tuning without [CLS] token;
BioBERT+LSTM CLS: model of applying LSTM on the [CLS] tokens of intermediate layers;
BioBERT+Att CLS: model of applying attention mechanism on the [CLS] tokens of intermediate layers.
(a) Example from PPI corpus (Label: Positive).
(b) Example from DDI corpus (Label: EFFECT).
(c) Example from ChemProt corpus (Label: CPR:3).
Fig. 3: Attention weights visualization.
tasks. Thus, utilizing all the outputs from the last layer sentence (Fig 3a), the words of entity token (@PROTEIN$)
generally gives us better results. and the word ”activates” (trigger word of PPI) have larger
In addition, we also compare our method with the mech- weights than other words. Similarly, the trigger words ”in-
anism of utilizing the [CLS] outputs from the intermediate hibit” and ”mediate” have larger attention weights in the DDI
layers. The last two rows in Table IV show the performance and ChemProt examples respectively. Recall these sentences
of BioBERT model after adding the information from the were not correctly predicted when attention was not used to
[CLS] outputs of all intermediate layers. As it is shown, highlight the information from the “trigger word”, which also
our method of using information from the last layer achieves demonstrates the importance of the information from the last
better performance than the mechanism of summarizing the layer.
[CLS] outputs from the intermediate layers. Compared with
D. More analysis of attention weights
theoriginalBioBERT model,weevenobservethe dropinthe
performance after including the [CLS] outputs from the in- After providing some examples of attention weight distri-
termediate layers in some cases (e.g., BioBERT+LSTM CLS bution in the sentences, it is useful to conduct an analysis
on PPI task). Those results imply that [CLS] outputs in the on the attention weights and investigate the overall weight
intermediate layers cannot provide enough useful information distribution on the words in the corpora.
for our relation extraction tasks. Previously, we have shown that the attention mechanism
will learn relatively larger weights on trigger word of the
C. Visualization of attention weights
relations using three examples. In order to understand the
The information acquired by attention mechanism from the attentionweightespeciallyontriggerwordsinamoregeneral
last layer has been shown to improve the model performance. way, we need to consider all the words in the corpora. Given
In this section, we will visualize the attention weight distri- the fact that the trigger words usually appear near the entities
bution on the words of sentences and examine the words the of the relation, we collect all the weights of three words
model is paying more attention to. around the entities in the positive instances and take the
We select an example from each of the three tasks that average of the weights to acquire the global attention for
were misclassified by the original BioBERT model but are each word. Considering the different forms of the words, we
correctly predicted by the new method. In Fig 3, we visualize utilize Porter’s stemmer [35] to remove the morphological
the weights based on the darkness of the color, with words in affixes from each word and only use the word stem for the
darker color having larger weights. global attention weight calculation. For instance, the stem for
We can see that the attention mechanism is giving large the word ”activate” is ”activ”, and many other words like
weights on the important words that indicate the relation ”activates” and ”activation” have the same word stem.
betweentheentities.Typically,thewordthatisusedtoexpress In Table V, we show the top 10 words that have large
the relation in a sentence is called ”trigger word” of the learned weight from the attention mechanism for the dataset
relation. The attention mechanism is gaining the knowledge of each task. Among the top words, we can see that most of
of ”trigger word” in our tasks. For example, in the PPI them are ”trigger words” of the relations, which indicates that
Task WordStem In the future, We will continue our investigation on extraction
activ(ate),complex,associ(ate),interact,human
PPI of other relations between biomedical entities. We will also
protein,bind,domain,specif(y),receptor
concomitantli,combin(e),concomit(ant),increas(e),use investigatehowourmethodcanhelpothertasksinbiomedical
DDI
concurr(ent),decreas(e),inhibit,receiv(e),administ(er) domain.
phosphoryl(ate),attenu(ate),stimul(ate),deriv(e),regul(ate)
ChemProt
novel,metabol(ize),reduc(e),induc(e),inhibit
REFERENCES
TABLE V: Top words with large attention weight from
[1] G. Sierra, R. Alarco´n, C. Aguilar, and C. Bach, “Definitional verbal
corpora of PPI, DDI and ChemProt tasks. patterns for semantic relation extraction,” Terminology. International
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Issues in Specialized Communica-
tion,vol.14,no.1,pp.74–98,2008.
[2] A. Culotta and J. Sorensen, “Dependency tree kernels for relation ex-
traction,”inProceedingsofthe42ndAnnualMeetingoftheAssociation
forComputationalLinguistics(ACL-04),2004,pp.423–429.
[3] H. Zhang, R. Guan, F. Zhou, Y. Liang, Z.-H. Zhan, L. Huang, and
X.Feng,“Deepresidualconvolutionalneuralnetworkforprotein-protein
interactionextraction,”IEEEAccess,vol.7,pp.89354–89365,2019.
[4] S. K. Sahu and A. Anand, “Drug-drug interaction extraction from
biomedical texts using long short-term memory network,” Journal of
biomedicalinformatics,vol.86,pp.15–24,2018.
[5] A. M. Dai and Q. V. Le, “Semi-supervised sequence learning,” in
Advances in neural information processing systems, 2015, pp. 3079–
3087.
[6] M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee,
andL.Zettlemoyer,“Deepcontextualizedwordrepresentations,”arXiv
preprintarXiv:1802.05365,2018.
[7] J.Devlin,M.-W.Chang,K.Lee,andK.Toutanova,“Bert:Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv
Fig. 4: Comparison of trigger word weights in positive and preprintarXiv:1810.04805,2018.
negativeinstances.Thefirsttwowords(associateandinteract) [8] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever,
“Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI Blog,
arefromPPItask,themiddletwowords(decreaseandinhibit)
vol.1,no.8,p.9,2019.
are from DDI task and the last two words (stimulate and [9] A.Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N.Gomez,
regulate) are from ChemProt task. Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
inneuralinformationprocessingsystems,2017,pp.5998–6008.
[10] I. Tenney, D. Das, and E. Pavlick, “Bert rediscovers the classical nlp
pipeline,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1905.05950,2019.
theattentionmechanismislearningtheknowledgeofrelations [11] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
computation,vol.9,no.8,pp.1735–1780,1997.
from the last layer of BERT model.
[12] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointlylearningtoalignandtranslate,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1409.0473,
E. Trigger word weight comparison between positive and 2014.
negative instances [13] M. Krallinger, F. Leitner, C. Rodriguez-Penagos, and A. Valencia,
“Overview of the protein-protein interaction annotation extraction task
We have seen that the attention mechanism is giving rela- ofbiocreativeii,”Genomebiology,vol.9,no.2,p.S4,2008.
tively large weights on trigger words of relations on positive [14] M.Herrero-Zazo,I.Segura-Bedmar,P.Mart´ınez,andT.Declerck,“The
ddicorpus:fanannotatedcorpuswithpharmacologicalsubstancesand
instances. For the negative instances, small weights should be
drug–drug interactions,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 46,
learnedontriggerwordssincethereisnorelationshipbetween no.5,pp.914–920,2013.
the entities. Therefore, we compare the trigger word weights [15] M. Krallinger, O. Rabal, S. A. Akhondi et al., “Overview of the
biocreativevichemical-proteininteractiontrack,”inProceedingsofthe
betweenpositiveandnegativeinstancesandgivesixexamples
sixthBioCreativechallengeevaluationworkshop,vol.1,2017,pp.141–
in Fig 4 from the three tasks. We can see that the learned 146.
triggerwordweightsinpositiveinstancesaremuchlargerthan [16] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their composi-
the weights in the negative instances. This demonstrates that
tionality,”inAdvancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,2013,
theattentionmechanismcanautomaticallylearnthedifference pp.3111–3119.
between positive and negative instances. [17] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors
for word representation,” in Proceedings of the 2014 conference on
empiricalmethodsinnaturallanguageprocessing(EMNLP),2014,pp.
V. CONCLUSION
1532–1543.
In this paper, we propose a new fine-tune process for [18] B. Chiu, G. Crichton, A. Korhonen, and S. Pyysalo, “How to train
goodwordembeddingsforbiomedicalnlp,”inProceedingsofthe15th
BERT model to utilize all the outputs from the last layer.
workshop on biomedical natural language processing, 2016, pp. 166–
We verify the effectiveness of the method on three relation 174.
extraction tasks: PPI, DDI and ChemProt. The experimental [19] Y.-L. Hsieh, Y.-C. Chang, N.-W. Chang, and W.-L. Hsu, “Identifying
protein-proteininteractionsinbiomedicalliteratureusingrecurrentneu-
results illustrate that the proposed method achieves state-of-
ralnetworkswithlongshort-termmemory,”inProceedingsoftheeighth
the-art performance on all three tasks. Also, the visualization international joint conference on natural language processing (volume
and analysis of the weights in attention mechanism also 2:shortpapers),vol.2,2017,pp.240–245.
[20] P.Su,G.Li,C.Wu,andK.Vijay-Shanker,“Usingdistantsupervision
demonstrates that our method is learning the key knowledge
toaugmentmanuallyannotateddataforrelationextraction,”BioRxiv,p.
of the relations in the sentence to help the relation extraction. 626226,2019.
[21] A.Radford,K.Narasimhan,T.Salimans,andI.Sutskever,“Improving
language understanding with unsupervised learning,” Technical report,
OpenAI,2018.
[22] J. Lee, W. Yoon, S. Kim, D. Kim, S. Kim, C. H. So, and J. Kang,
“Biobert: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for
biomedicaltextmining,”Bioinformatics,vol.36,no.4,pp.1234–1240,
2020.
[23] I. Beltagy, A. Cohan, and K. Lo, “Scibert: Pretrained contextualized
embeddingsforscientifictext,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1903.10676,2019.
[24] Y.Peng,S.Yan,andZ.Lu,“Transferlearninginbiomedicalnaturallan-
guageprocessing:Anevaluationofbertandelmoontenbenchmarking
datasets,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1906.05474,2019.
[25] A.E.Johnson,T.J.Pollard,L.Shen,H.L.Li-wei,M.Feng,M.Ghas-
semi,B.Moody,P.Szolovits,L.A.Celi,andR.G.Mark,“Mimic-iii,a
freelyaccessiblecriticalcaredatabase,”Scientificdata,vol.3,p.160035,
2016.
[26] W. Ammar, D. Groeneveld, C. Bhagavatula, I. Beltagy, M. Crawford,
D. Downey, J. Dunkelberger, A. Elgohary, S. Feldman, V. Ha et al.,
“Constructionoftheliteraturegraphinsemanticscholar,”arXivpreprint
arXiv:1805.02262,2018.
[27] Y. Song, J. Wang, Z. Liang, Z. Liu, and T. Jiang, “Utilizing bert
intermediate layers for aspect based sentiment analysis and natural
languageinference,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2002.04815,2020.
[28] A.Airola,S.Pyysalo,J.Bjo¨rne,T.Pahikkala,F.Ginter,andT.Salakoski,
“All-paths graph kernel for protein-protein interaction extraction with
evaluation of cross-corpus learning,” BMC bioinformatics, vol. 9, no.
S11,p.S2,2008.
[29] S. Kim, H. Liu, L. Yeganova, and W. J. Wilbur, “Extracting drug–
druginteractionsfromliteratureusingarichfeature-basedlinearkernel
approach,”Journalofbiomedicalinformatics,vol.55,pp.23–30,2015.
[30] N. Warikoo125, Y.-C. Chang, P.-T. Lai45, and W.-L. Hsu, “Ctcpi–
convolution tree kernel-based chemical-protein interaction detection,”
2017.
[31] Y.PengandZ.Lu,“Deeplearningforextractingprotein-proteininter-
actions from biomedical literature,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.01556,
2017.
[32] S. Liu, B. Tang, Q. Chen, and X. Wang, “Drug-drug interaction
extractionviaconvolutionalneuralnetworks,”Computationalandmath-
ematicalmethodsinmedicine,vol.2016,2016.
[33] R. Bunescu, R. Ge, R. J. Kate, E. M. Marcotte, R. J. Mooney,
A.K.Ramani,andY.W.Wong,“Comparativeexperimentsonlearning
information extractors for proteins and their interactions,” Artificial
intelligenceinmedicine,vol.33,no.2,pp.139–155,2005.
[34] Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey,
M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. Gao, K. Macherey et al., “Google’s neural
machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and
machinetranslation,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1609.08144,2016.
[35] M.F.Porteretal.,“Analgorithmforsuffixstripping.”Program,vol.14,
no.3,pp.130–137,1980.
APPENDIX
COMPARISONOFBERTMODELSINBIOMEDICALDOMAIN
We provide the performance of BioBERT, SciBERT and
BlueBERT in biomedical domain on the PPI, DDI and
ChemProt tasks. The best result on each metric is highlighted
with bond font in Table VI.
Task Metrics BioBERT SciBERT BlueBERT
Precision 79.0 78.4 69.3
PPI Recall 83.3 79.5 75.0
Fscore 81.0 78.8 71.9
Precision 77.4 80.1 77.7
DDI Recall 79.4 78.1 75.4
Fscore 78.4 79.1 76.5
Precision 74.6 74.3 70.8
ChemProt Recall 76.8 73.2 64.8
Fscore 75.7 74.0 67.7
TABLE VI: Performance of three BERT models in
biomedical domain on PPI, DDI and ChemProt tasks.