Automated Scoring for Reading Comprehension
via In-context BERT Tuning
Nigel Fernandez1, Aritra Ghosh1, Naiming Liu2, Zichao Wang2, Benoˆıt
Choffin, Richard Baraniuk2, and Andrew Lan1
1University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2Rice University
Contact Email: andrewlan@cs.umass.edu
Abstract. Automatedscoringofopen-endedstudentresponseshasthe
potential to significantly reduce human grader effort. Recent advances
in automated scoring often leverage textual representations based on
pre-trained language models such as BERT and GPT as input to scor-
ing models. Most existing approaches train a separate model for each
item/question,whichissuitableforscenariossuchasessayscoringwhere
itemscanbequitedifferentfromoneanother.However,theseapproaches
have two limitations: 1) they fail to leverage item linkage for scenarios
such as reading comprehension where multiple items may share a read-
ing passage; 2) they are not scalable since storing one model per item
becomes difficult when models have a large number of parameters. In
thispaper,wereportour(grandprize-winning)solutiontotheNational
AssessmentofEducationProgress(NAEP)automatedscoringchallenge
forreadingcomprehension.Ourapproach,in-contextBERTfine-tuning,
produces a single shared scoring model for all items with a carefully-
designedinputstructuretoprovidecontextualinformationoneachitem.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach via local evaluations
usingthetrainingdatasetprovidedbythechallenge.Wealsodiscussthe
biases, common error types, and limitations of our approach.
Keywords: Automated Scoring · BERT · Reading Comprehension
1 Introduction
Automated scoring (AS) refers to the problem of using algorithms to automati-
cally score student responses to open-ended items. AS approaches have the po-
tentialtosignificantlyreducetheamountofhumangradingeffortandscalewell
toanever-increasingstudentpopulation.AShasbeenstudiedinmanydifferent
contexts, especially essays, known as automated essay scoring (AES) [1,18], but
also in other contexts such as automatic short answer grading (ASAG) [23,31]
for domains including humanities, social sciences [21], and math [3].
Existing approaches for AS include feature engineering, i.e., developing fea-
tures that summarize the length, syntax [4,9,18], cohesion [11], relevance to
the item [19], and semantics [25] of student responses combined with machine
learning-basedclassifiers[2,16]topredictthescore.Theseapproacheshaveexcel-
lentinterpretabilitybutrequirehumanexpertiseinfeaturedevelopment.Recent
3202
nuJ
51
]GL.sc[
2v46890.5022:viXra
2 N. Fernandez et al.
approaches leverage advances in deep learning to produce better textual repre-
sentationsofstudentresponses,alleviatingtheneedtorelyonhuman-engineered
features. Examples include combining neural networks with human-engineered
featuresforscoreprediction[24]andespeciallyapproachesthatfine-tuneneural
language models (LMs) such as BERT [8] and GPT-2 [20] on the downstream
AS task [14,15,22,28]. Despite concerns on the vulnerability against gaming in-
put [14] and fairness aspects [13] of these approaches, they have performed well
in terms of scoring accuracy on publicly available benchmark datasets such as
the automated student assessment prize (ASAP) for essay scoring [1].
However, existing AS approaches are limited in many ways, including a sig-
nificant one we address in this paper: They almost always train a separate AS
model for each item. This approach is acceptable in contexts such as AES since
the items (essay prompts) are likely not highly related to each other. However,
in other contexts such as reading comprehension, multiple items may share the
samebackgroundpassage;Trainingaseparatemodelforeachitemfailstolever-
agethissharedbackgroundinformation.Moreimportantly,thisapproachresults
in a separate model for each item; for LM-based models that have millions of
parameters, this approach creates a significant model storage problem.
Contributions In this paper, we detail a novel AS approach for reading com-
prehension items via in-context fine-tuning of LMs, which is our (grand prize-
winning)solutiontotheitem-specificpartoftheNationalAssessmentofEduca-
tional Progress (NAEP) automated scoring challenge.1 We make our implemen-
tation publicly available2 to facilitate future work on automated scoring. Our
contributions are listed below:
– We develop an AS approach based on multi-task and meta-learning ideas,
which fine-tunes an LM with a carefully designed input format that cap-
turesthecontextofeachindividualitem.Ourapproacheffectivelyleverages
potential linkage across all items.
– We demonstrate the effectiveness of our AS approach through experimental
evaluation on the NAEP challenge training dataset. Our approach outper-
formsexistingLM-basedASapproachesandsignificantlyoutperformsother
non-LM-based baselines.
– We qualitatively analyze the cause of scoring errors made by our approach.
We also show that our AS approach exhibits modest bias towards different
student demographic groups. We outline a series of avenues for future work
to improve the applicability of our approach in real-world settings.
2 Methodology
Inthissection,wefirstintroducetheproblemsetupfortheNAEPASchallenge
(Section 2.1) and then detail our meta-trained BERT with in-context tuning
approach for reading comprehension AS (Section 2.2).
1 RanbytheUSDept.ofEducation:https://github.com/NAEP-AS-Challenge/info
2 Our code can be found at: https://github.com/ni9elf/automated-scoring
Automated Scoring for Reading Comprehension via In-context BERT Tuning 3
2.1 Problem Formulation
Table 1. Text snippets from an example grade 8 reading comprehension item.
Passage Longago,apoorcountryboylefthometoseekhisfortune.
Dayandnighthetraveled,stoppingtoeatatinnsalong...
Question Describe what kind of person the merchant is. Give one
detail from the story to support your answer.
Student Responses Scores
Dataset “Themerchantisaveryoptimisticandperseveringperson. 3
For example, it states how he kept walking on even with
an empty stomach. This shows that he is hopeful and not
willing to give up after he had come so far.”
“the merchant is a determined and honest person” 2
“Dishonest because he didn’t want to pay for the eggs.” 1
TheNAEPASchallengefeatures20readingcomprehensionitemsfromgrade
4andgrade8.Eachreadingcomprehensionitem,indexedbyi,isassociatedwith
1)alongreadingpassagetextP ,2)ashortquestiontextQ ,3)ascoringrubric,
i i
and 4) a large training dataset of human scored student responses Dtrain =
i
{(x ,y )}. The goal is for trained models to predict human scores for student
j j
responsesinthetestdatasetDtest ={(xtarget)}foralltasksi.Akeyobservation
i j
is that pairs of items (l,m), one from grade 4 (l) and one from grade 8 (m),
often share passage (P = P ) and question (Q = Q ) texts. This linkage
l m l m
across items motivates our approach of leveraging shared item semantics by not
treatingitemsindependently.Insteadoftrainingaseparatemodelforeachitem,
as in existing approaches, we meta-train a single shared AS model to perform
in-context learning across all items. A snapshot of an example item from the
NAEP question tool3 is shown in Table 1.
2.2 Our Approach: Meta-trained BERT with In-context Tuning
LM Fine-tuning Setup. We first describe our LM fine-tuning approach for
reading comprehension AS. We use a pre-trained BERT [8] model as the base
LM for AS.4 We use a combination of the passage P , question Q , and student
i i
responsetextxtarget asinputtotheBERTmodel.Weadd[SEP],theseparator
j
tokeninBERT’svocabulary,betweenthesepartstohelpthemodeldifferentiate
input text segments with different purposes. Since the average passage length
was 657 words, directly inputting every token in the passage text exceeds the
maximum input length of 512 tokens for BERT. As a workaround, we use a
3 https://nces.ed.gov/NationsReportCard/nqt/Search
4 We also tried GPT-2 [20] and reached similar scoring performance. Therefore, for
simplicity of exposition, we only detail our approach with BERT as the base LM.
4 N. Fernandez et al.
score
BERT
[CLS] Answer Template [SEP] Passage Template [SEP] Question Template [SEP] In-context Examples Template [SEP]
Passage Answer Template score this answer: [SEP]
scores: poor fair good excellent
Question
Passage Template passage:
Question Template question:
In-context Examples Template
example: score: excellent [SEP]
example: score: poor [SEP] ...
ML
tupnI
txetnoc-nI
smetI
ssorcA
deniart-ateM
[CLS] Classification Layer 1 2 3 4
Fig.1. Meta-trained BERT via in-context tuning. Best viewed in color.
separate, fixed BERT model (we do not fine-tune its parameters) to encode the
passage text and use its [CLS] embedding vector as input to the BERT model
for AS. We experiment with two ways to encode the passage text: either the
entire passage as one token, or each sentence as one token. For the downstream
AStask,wefeedthe[CLS]embeddingvectoroftheBERTASmodeltoalinear
classification layer followed by softmax [10] during fine-tuning.
Meta-training BERT with In-context Learning. We now detail the key
component of our approach, in-context learning of a shared BERT AS model
across all items. Our approach is to use a carefully-designed input structure to
providecontexttothesharedBERTASmodelandassociateitwitheachspecific
item. To achieve this, following recent approaches for meta-training-based in-
context learning [6,17], we add in-context examples which are (response, score)
pairs from the training set, to the input. Intuitively, these examples provide
further context about each item and enable the BERT AS model to focus on
learningtoassociateresponsestoscoresgiventhepassageandthequestion,thus
enabling knowledge sharing across items.
Figure 1 shows the input structure to the BERT AS model. We build the
modelinputbyconcatenatingthetargetstudentresponsetextxtarget thatneeds
j
to be scored, passage P , question Q , and K response-score examples E ⊆
i i i
Dtrain,|E | = K. Moreover, we convert the numeric scores y in the in-context
i i j
examples E to meaningful words as: {1 : poor,2 : fair,3 : good,4 : excellent}
i
Automated Scoring for Reading Comprehension via In-context BERT Tuning 5
before adding them to the model input. We add semantically meaningful task
instructions to each input component as shown in Figure 1.
Since each item i has a different range of possible scores y ∈ [s =
j min
{1},s = {2,3,4}], we add possible score classes for xtarget as explicit op-
max j
tions [26] in the input to make the model aware of valid scores as seen in the
answertemplateinFigure1.Furthermore,wemaskouttheinvalidscoreclasses
foreachresponsebeforecomputingthesoftmax.Thismaskingprocedureensures
that training loss is backpropagated over valid score classes only, enabling us to
meta-train a single shared model for all items.
Meta-training. We train our AS model on the union of training datasets for
all items (cid:83)20 Dtrain. Let θ represent the model parameters to be learned, i.e.,
i=1 i
BERTparameterswhicharefine-tunedafterinitializationfromtheirpre-trained
values and the classification layer parameters which are learned from scratch.
Thein-contextlearningobjectiveL foranitemissimplythecrossentropy,i.e.,
i
negative log-likelihood loss [10]:
(cid:88)
L (θ)= [−logp (ytarget|xtarget,P ,Q ,E )],
i θ j j i i i
(xtarget,ytarget)∈Dtrain
j j i
while the objective across all 20 items is given by:
20
(cid:88)
L(θ)= L (θ).
i
i=1
In contrast, existing approaches result in a separate set of model parameter θ
i
foreachitem,whichincreasesthenumberofmodelparametersandthusstorage
space requirement by 20×.
3 Experimental Evaluation
In this section, we detail our experiments on the training dataset provided by
the NAEP AS challenge. We conduct both quantitative evaluations on scoring
accuracy of our approach and qualitative evaluations on the error types and
fairness aspects of our approach.
3.1 Dataset Details
Each item in the NAEP AS Challenge has responses from either one of two
formats: short (around one sentence) or extended (up to around five sentences)
responses,leadingtodifferentscoreclasses.Theminimumscoreforallitemsis1,
withthemaximumbeingeither2or3forshortresponsesand3or4forextended
responses. Passages and questions have around 657 and 27 words on average,
respectively. Our training dataset (combined from the challenge’s training and
validationdatasets)containsonaveragemorethan18,000human-scoredstudent
6 N. Fernandez et al.
responsesperitem.Eachresponseinthetrainingdatasetisscoredbyeitherone
or two human raters. We are also provided with the gender and ethnicity of the
studentwhosubmittedeachresponse.Theaveragestudentresponselengthis19
and 37 words for grades 4 and 8, respectively. There are 4 unique passages and
12 unique questions; 8 pairs of items (one from grade 4 and one from grade 8)
share the same passage and question text. The 4 remaining items have unique
questions.
3.2 Metrics and Baselines
FollowingtheNAEPASchallenge,weusequadraticweightedKappa(QWK),a
popular metric for AES, as the accuracy metric. QWK examines the agreement
between the predicted scores and the ground truth human scores for ordered
score classes. We compare our approach, dubbed meta-trained BERT with
in-context tuning, to various baselines including existing approaches for AES
and several variants of our approach, listed below. The latter serves as an abla-
tion study to verify the importance of each component of our approach.
– Human provides an estimated upper bound on scoring accuracy given by
the inter-rater agreement. For each item, we calculate the QWK on around
550 training responses that are scored by two human raters.
– Majority simply scores each response by the most frequent score for that
item in the training dataset.
– Feature Engineering uses a feature-engineering approach with a selected
set of features listed in Table 2 for a random forest classifier.
– Stacked LSTM uses a stack of two LSTMs on Word2Vec embeddings fol-
lowed by a non-linear output layer using ReLU activation.
– Clusering + Classification, uses cluster indicators of student responses
(computed via K-means clustering on their Word2Vec embeddings) in con-
junction with other features for a random forest classifier.
– BERT (response) fine-tunes a BERT model for each item independently
using only response text as input, resulting in 20 different AS models.
– BERT (passage+question+response) adds passage and question infor-
mation as input to the setup of BERT (response).
– BERT in-contextaddsin-contextexamplesasinputtothesetupofBERT
(passage+question+response) providing further context on each item.
– BERT multi-task uses a multi-task learning approach and fine-tunes a
single shared BERT AS model with 20 separate classification layers, one for
each item. We backpropagate the loss for a student response from item i to
train only the corresponding classification layer while fine-tuning the shared
BERT model on all items.
3.3 Implementation Details
Preprocessing: Spell Check. Weautomaticallycorrectspellingerrorsinstu-
dent responses for two reasons: 1) the scoring rubrics have clear instructions on
Automated Scoring for Reading Comprehension via In-context BERT Tuning 7
Table 2. Human-designed features used in baseline models.
Type Features
Length Countsofwords,characters,stopwords,andpunctuation.Characterto
word ratio.
Syntax Counts of lemmas, nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and conjunctives.
Readability Automated Readability Index, Coleman Liau Index, Dale Chall Score,
Smog Index, and Flesch Score.
Table 3. Experimental results averaged across reading comprehension items in the
NAEPASchallengedataset.ModelperformanceinQuadraticWeightedKappa(higher
is better). Bold indicates best result except human performance.
Approach Avg. QWK p-value
Human 0.878 -
Majority 0.527 -
Feature Engineering + Random Forest 0.443 -
Stacked LSTM 0.657 -
Clustering + Classification 0.709 -
BERT (response) 0.828 -
BERT (passage+question+response) 0.828 0.414
BERT in-context 0.833 0.001
BERT multi-task 0.833 1.6×10−4
Meta-trained BERT in-context 0.841 9.6×10−5
ignoringsucherrorsand2)totransformtheresponsetextwrittenbystudentsto
besimilartowhatBERTusesinpre-training.Spellingerrorsarefrequentlyseen
ingrade4responsesbutarelessfrequentingrade8.Weexperimentwithtraining
models on student responses with and without spell checking; The spell checked
version leads to an improvement of around 0.5% on QWK. We use NeuSpell’s
BERT based checker [12] to correct spelling errors on all student responses.
Experimental Setup. For our local evaluation, we perform five-fold cross-
validation on the training dataset for each item and use three folds for training,
one fold for validation to perform early stopping, and one fold for testing. For
double-scored student responses where the human-rater scores do not agree, we
use the score by the first rater, following the challenge specification.
We use a pre-trained BERT [8] model with 110M parameters; all implemen-
tation was done using the HuggingFace [27] transformers library. We use the
Adam optimizer, a batch size of 32, a learning rate of 2·10−5, and a maximum
input length of 512 tokens. We do not perform any hyperparameter tuning and
simplyusethedefaultparametersforBERT.Wefine-tuneallBERT-basedmod-
els for 10 epochs since they reach optimal performance on the validation set by
around 5 epochs. Our meta-trained BERT with in-context tuning takes 6 hours
per training epoch on a single NVIDIA RTX 8000 GPU.
8 N. Fernandez et al.
Table 4. Results averaged over shared vs. non-shared reading comprehension items
fromgrade4(G4)andgrade8(G8).ModelperformanceinQuadraticWeightedKappa
(higher is better). Bold indicates best result except human performance.
Approach Non-shared Shared Non-shared Shared
G4 G4 G8 G8
Human 0.860 0.899 0.809 0.885
BERT (response) 0.825 0.842 0.763 0.840
BERT (passage+question+response) 0.820 0.843 0.762 0.839
BERT in-context 0.822 0.847 0.771 0.843
BERT multi-task 0.817 0.848 0.765 0.845
Meta-trained BERT in-context 0.826 0.856 0.771 0.853
For our meta-trained BERT model with in-context tuning, for each training
response,werandomlysampleupto25in-contextexamplesperscoreclassfrom
the training dataset of the corresponding item. We ensure at least one example
from each valid scoring class so that the set of examples cover all classes and
is diverse. Given the restriction on input length for BERT, we truncate each
example to 70 tokens. At test time, for a target student response to be scored,
werepeattheaforementionedprocessofrandomlysamplingexamplesfor8times
and average the predicted score class probabilities.
3.4 Results and Analysis
WereporttheaverageQWKacrossallitemsandallcrossvalidationfoldsforall
approaches in Table 3. LM-based approaches consistently outperform non-LM-
based approaches, by a significant margin, while our approach, meta-trained
BERT in-context, performs best. We perform paired t-tests among LM-based
approaches using BERT (response) as the baseline; We see that learning a sin-
glesharedmodelacrossitemsachievesstatisticallysignificantimprovementover
learningonemodelperitem.Thisobservationvalidatesourintuitionthatwecan
leverage shared information across reading comprehension items to improve AS
accuracy. We also observe that, surprisingly, adding passage and question text
as input in addition to response text does not lead to improved performance.
This observation suggests that our models are trained for AS but cannot per-
form reading comprehension; We discuss this in detail in Section 4. Table 4 lists
performance of LM-based approaches on shared vs. non-shared items. Overall,
our approach performs better than BERT (response), more on items that are
shared across grades 4 and 8 and less on items that are not shared. This ob-
servation suggests that our approach may struggle to generalize to previously
unseen items, which is an important avenue for future work. For most items,
some LM-based approach reach a level of AS accuracy close to that for humans
(as measured in QWK between two human scorers). While there is still room
for improvement, it is important to gauge the limit of AS approaches due to
intrinsic noise in data.
Automated Scoring for Reading Comprehension via In-context BERT Tuning 9
Table 5. Illustration of responses that our approach tends to score incorrectly.
Predicted Ground
Error Type Example Student Response
Score Truth
Spelling/grammar “mearchant are a good man because he 2 3
played the innkeeper and kept his ...”
Human error & “Long ago a poor country boy left home 1 3
subjectivity toseekhisfortune.Dayandnighthe...”
Infrequent cor- “merchantisdescribedasbrave ashegot 2 4
rect answers on a ship and visited multiple ports ...”
Imitation “The merchant is dishonest because he 3 1
doesn’t want to pay for the eggs ...”
Character coref- “Themerchant isgreedybecausehegives 4 1
erence theinnkeeper eggsbutwhentheboy...”
Qualitative Error Analysis. We randomly sample 100 responses to the item
“describe what kind of person the merchant is ...” as seen in Table 1 that
our approach scores incorrectly. We identify 5 main error types and list them
in Table 5 with made-up examples that reflect our observation: 1) spelling and
grammar errors (not caught by spell check), 2) human error and subjectivity,
3) infrequent correct responses (our approach struggles at recognizing correct
responses that do not occur frequently), 4) imitation (incorrect responses with
content/structure that mimic correct responses), 5) character coreference (re-
ferring to a character different than the one that the item asks about). These
observationsrevealfurtherwaystoimproveLM-basedASapproachesforreading
comprehension.
Fairness Studies. We conduct a preliminary investigation into the fairness
aspects of our approach using the demographic information in the NAEP AS
challenge dataset. There are a total of 9 demographic groups, each correspond-
ing to a gender or an ethnicity group. For students in each group, we compute
the average prediction bias, i.e., the average difference between the predicted
score and the actual score. A positive bias means that the model overestimates
the score for the group while a negative bias means that the model underesti-
mates the score. We experiment with two settings: not using the demographic
information(gender/ethnicity)asinputvs.usingitasinputtotheBERTmodel.
Wetestbothsettingssinceitisnotclearwhetherleavingoutdemographicinfor-
mationorothersensitiveattributesresultsinmorefairmodels[29].Whenusing
demographic information as input, we prepend the input with textual instruc-
tions such as “score this answer written by a Female Asian student”, according
to the demographics of the student. Figure 2 shows the prediction biases for a
shared item in both grades 4 and 8. We see that our approach tends to overesti-
matethescore,exceptforPacificIslanders/AmericanIndiansongrade4,which
is possibly due to the small number of such students in the training data. In
10 N. Fernandez et al.
general, the biases are within an acceptable range (the same conclusion is also
reached on the official challenge test set).
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
MaleFe maleWhiteA mA erf ir ci ac nanHispanicAsianInA dm iae nricaI nslaP na dc ei rficMultiracial
saiB
noitciderP
egarevA
0.08
With Demographic Data
0.06 Without Demographic Data
0.04
0.02
0.00
MaleFe maleWhiteA mA erf ir ci ac nanHispanicAsianInA dm iae nricaI nslaP na dc ei rficMultiracial
Fig.2. Prediction biases grouped by student demographics with and without demo-
graphicdataasinputforashareditemusedinbothgrade4(left)andgrade8(right).
4 Discussion, Conclusions, and Future Work
In this paper, we detailed our solution to the NAEP automated scoring chal-
lenge, an in-context BERT fine-tuning approach that is suitable for reading
comprehension items. We now discuss some important observations and outline
several avenues for future work towards the scalable deployment of language
model-based automated scoring approaches in real-world scenarios.
Firstandforemost,weobservethatourbest-performingmodeltakesasinput
only the in-context examples, question text and the target response but not the
reading comprehension passage. Although this approach is due to the technical
limitation that these passages are often longer than what language models can
input,thisobservationmeansthatourmodeldoesnotmasterthetaskofreading
comprehension; instead, it only learns to assess how appropriate the response is
given the item. Future work should find ways to efficiently pass information
contained in the passage to the model using a small number of tokens, such as
retrievingonlyrelevantsentences[5].Modelsthatlearntoscoreresponsesinthe
context of the passage will be better suited for generalization to new items.
Second, we observe that adding an additional spell checking step improved
automated scoring accuracy and that using BERT only as a text featurization
tool without fine-tuning leads to a significant drop in scoring accuracy. These
observation suggest that BERT is not adept at student-generated text. Future
work should pre-train base language models on student-generated text before
applying them to downstream tasks.
Third,weobservethatourmodelsdonotofferanyexplanationontheirscore
predictionsduetotheblack-boxnatureoflanguagemodels.Futureworkshould
incorporate grading rubrics into the scoring model or use other ways to improve
model interpretability, such as using attention maps [7].
Fourth,weobservethatourmodels,withoutexplicitlycontrollingforfairness,
exhibitunavoidablebutmodestbiasestowardstudentsindifferentdemographic
Automated Scoring for Reading Comprehension via In-context BERT Tuning 11
groups. Future work should incorporate fairness regularization into the training
objective to promote fairness across students [30].
Acknowledgements. Fernandez, Ghosh, and Lan are partially supported by
the National Science Foundation under grants IIS-1917713 and IIS-2118706.
References
1. The hewlett foundation: Automated essay scoring. Online: https://www.kaggle.
com/c/asap-aes, accessed: May 2022
2. Attali, Y., Burstein, J.: Automated essay scoring with e-rater® v.2. The Journal
of Technology, Learning and Assessment 4(3) (2006)
3. Baral, S., Botelho, A.F., Erickson, J.A., Benachamardi, P., Heffernan, N.T.: Im-
proving automated scoring of student open responses in mathematics. In: 14th
International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM) (2021)
4. Burstein, J.: The e-rater® scoring engine: Automated essay scoring with natural
language processing. (2003)
5. Chen, D., Fisch, A., Weston, J., Bordes, A.: Reading wikipedia to answer open-
domain questions. In: 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL). pp. 1870–1879 (2017)
6. Chen, Y., Zhong, R., Zha, S., Karypis, G., He, H.: Meta-learning via language
model in-context tuning. In: 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL) (2022)
7. Clark, K., Khandelwal, U., Levy, O., Manning, C.D.: What does bert look at? an
analysis of bert’s attention. In: BlackBoxNLP@ACL (2019)
8. Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: BERT: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: NAACL-HLT (2019)
9. Foltz, P.W., Laham, D., Landauer, T.K.: The intelligent essay assessor: Appli-
cations to educational technology. Interactive Multimedia Electronic Journal of
Computer-Enhanced Learning 1(2), 939–944 (1999)
10. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A.: Deep Learning. MIT Press (2016)
11. Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D.S., Louwerse, M.M., Cai, Z.: Coh-Metrix: Analy-
sis of text on cohesion and language. Behavior research methods, instruments, &
computers 36(2), 193–202 (2004)
12. Jayanthi, S.M., Pruthi, D., Neubig, G.: NeuSpell: A neural spelling correction
toolkit.In:25thConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing
(EMNLP). pp. 158–164 (2020)
13. Litman,D.,Zhang,H.,Correnti,R.,Matsumura,L.C.,Wang,E.:Afairnesseval-
uation of automated methods for scoring text evidence usage in writing. In: 22nd
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED). pp. 255–267 (2021)
14. Lottridge, S., Godek, B., Jafari, A., Patel, M.: Comparing the robustness of deep
learning and classical automated scoring approaches to gaming strategies. Tech.
rep., Cambium Assessment Inc. (2021)
15. Mayfield,E.,Black,A.W.:Shouldyoufine-tunebertforautomatedessayscoring?
In: 15th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applica-
tions. pp. 151–162 (2020)
16. McNamara,D.S.,Crossley,S.A.,Roscoe,R.D.,Allen,L.K.,Dai,J.:Ahierarchical
classification approach to automated essay scoring. Assessing Writing 23, 35–59
(2015)
12 N. Fernandez et al.
17. Min, S., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., Hajishirzi, H.: MetaICL: Learning to learn in
context. In: NAACL-HLT (2022)
18. Page,E.B.:Theimminenceof...gradingessaysbycomputer.ThePhiDeltaKappan
47(5), 238–243 (1966)
19. Persing, I., Ng, V.: Modeling prompt adherence in student essays. In: 52nd Con-
ference of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) (2014)
20. Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Sutskever, I.: Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog (2019)
21. Sung,C.,Dhamecha,T.,Saha,S.,Ma,T.,Reddy,V.,Arora,R.:Pre-trainingBERT
on domain resources for short answer grading. In: 24th Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). pp. 6071–6075 (2019)
22. Taghipour, K., Ng, H.T.: A neural approach to automated essay scoring. In: 21st
Conference on Empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP). pp.
1882–1891 (2016)
23. Uto,M.,Uchida,Y.:Automatedshort-answergradingusingdeepneuralnetworks
and item response theory. In: 21st International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence in Education (AIED). pp. 334–339 (2020)
24. Uto, M., Xie, Y., Ueno, M.: Neural automated essay scoring incorporating hand-
craftedfeatures.In:28thConferenceonComputationalLinguistics(COLING).pp.
6077–6088 (2020)
25. Valenti,S.,Neri,F.,Cucchiarelli,A.:Anoverviewofcurrentresearchonautomated
essay grading. Journal of Information Technology Education: Research 2(1), 319–
330 (2003)
26. Wei,J.,Bosma,M.,Zhao,V.Y.,Guu,K.,Yu,A.W.,Lester,B.,Du,N.,Dai,A.M.,
Le,Q.V.:Finetunedlanguagemodelsarezero-shotlearners.In:10thInternational
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2022)
27. Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C., Moi, A., Cistac,
P., Rault, T., Louf, R., Funtowicz, M., Davison, J., Shleifer, S., von Platen, P.,
Ma, C., Jernite, Y., Plu, J., Xu, C., Scao, T.L., Gugger, S., Drame, M., Lhoest,
Q., Rush, A.M.: Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In:
EMNLP: System Demonstrations. pp. 38–45 (2020)
28. Yang, R., Cao, J., Wen, Z., Wu, Y., He, X.: Enhancing automated essay scoring
performance via fine-tuning pre-trained language models with combination of re-
gression and ranking. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP pp. 1560–1569 (2020)
29. Yu, R., Lee, H., Kizilcec, R.F.: Should college dropout prediction models include
protected attributes? In: 8th ACM Conference on Learning at Scale (L@S). pp.
91–100 (2021)
30. Zafar, M.B., Valera, I., Gomez Rodriguez, M., Gummadi, K.P.: Fairness beyond
disparatetreatment&disparateimpact:Learningclassificationwithoutdisparate
mistreatment. In: 26th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW).
pp. 1171–1180 (2017)
31. Zhang, Y., Shah, R., Chi, M.: Deep learning + student modeling + clustering: A
recipe for effective automatic short answer grading. In: 9th International Confer-
ence on Educational Data Mining (EDM) (2016)