BERT-ERC: Fine-tuning BERT is Enough for Emotion Recognition in
Conversation
XiangyuQin1,2*,ZhiyuWu1*,JinshiCui1†,TingtingZhang1,YanranLi2,JianLuan2‡,BinWang2,
LiWang3
1SchoolofIntelligenceScienceandTechnology,PekingUniversity
2XiaomiAILab
3SchoolofPsychologicalandCognitiveSciencesandBeijingKeyLaboratoryofBehaviorandMentalHealth,Peking
University
2001213087@stu.pku.edu.cn,wuzhiyu@pku.edu.cn,cjs@cis.pku.edu.cn,zhangtingting3412@gmail.com,
yanranli.summer@gmail.com,luanjian78@hotmail.com,wangbin11@xiaomi.com,liwang@pku.edu.cn
Abstract Method MELD
PLM classifier
Previous works on emotion recognition in conversation
RGAT 62.80
(ERC) follow a two-step paradigm, which can be summa-
DialogGCN 63.02
rizedasfirstproducingcontext-independentfeaturesviafine-
RoBERTa-large DAGNN 63.12
tuning pretrained language models (PLMs) and then ana-
DialogRNN 63.61
lyzing contextual information and dialogue structure infor-
mationamongtheextractedfeatures.However,wediscover DAG-ERC 63.65
that this paradigm has several limitations. Accordingly, we RoBERTa-large MLP 63.39
propose a novel paradigm, i.e., exploring contextual infor-
mationanddialoguestructureinformationinthefine-tuning Table1:PilotexperimentonMELD(%).
step,andadaptingthePLMtotheERCtaskintermsofin-
put text, classification structure, and training strategy. Fur-
thermore, we develop our model BERT-ERC according to
the proposed paradigm, which improves ERC performance structure information consisting of non-textual informa-
inthreeaspects,namelysuggestivetext,fine-grainedclassi- tion of the conversation, such as the speaker information,
ficationmodule,andtwo-stagetraining.Comparedtoexist- the emotion states, and the relative position of the utter-
ing methods, BERT-ERC achieves substantial improvement
ances.Toexploitthesethreekindsofinformation,previous
onfourdatasets,indicatingitseffectivenessandgeneraliza-
works (Ghosal et al. 2019b; Majumder et al. 2019; Ishi-
tioncapability.Besides,wealsosetupthelimitedresources
watari et al. 2020; Shen et al. 2021) commonly follow a
scenario and the online prediction scenario to approximate
two-step paradigm of first extracting context-independent
real-worldscenarios.Extensiveexperimentsdemonstratethat
theproposedparadigmsignificantlyoutperformstheprevious featuresviafine-tuningpretrainedlanguagemodels(PLMs)
oneandcanbeadaptedtovariousscenes. andthencharacterizingcontextualinformationanddialogue
structure information among the obtained features by their
classifiers (models). For example, DialogRNN (Majumder
1 Introduction
etal.2019)firstextractsutterancefeatureswithRoBERTa-
Emotion Recognition in Conversation (ERC) aims to iden- large (Liu et al. 2019) and then uses three GRUs (Chung
tifytheemotionofeachutteranceinthedialogue(Poriaetal. etal.2014)toencodecontextualinformation,speakerstate,
2019).ThistaskhasbeenpopularlyexploredintheNLPre- and emotion state, respectively. To verify the contribution
searchcommunity(Ghosaletal.2019a;Lietal.2021;Gao of the contextual information and dialogue structure infor-
et al. 2021), which has wide applications in building auto- mationanalyzedinsteptwo,wedesignapilotexperiment.
maticconversationalagentsandmininguseropinions. Specifically,baselineintheexperimentusesRoBERTa-large
ExistingERCalgorithmsrevealmultipleinfluencingfac- and MLP as the PLM and classifier respectively, suggest-
tors for understanding conversation emotion. As shown in ingthatthesetwokindsofinformationremainunexplored.
Figure 1, we divided these factors into three groups: (1) Comparedto themethodsfollowing theprevious paradigm
query utterance information including the text of the in Table 1, the baseline achieves comparable performance
query utterance; (2) contextual information including the on MELD (Poria et al. 2018) dataset, indicating that the
text of the surrounding utterances (contexts); (3) dialogue two kinds of information encoded in the second step only
yields trivial improvement (e.g. DialogRNN only outper-
*Theseauthorscontributedequally.
†Correspondingauthor:cjs@cis.pku.edu.cn forms the baseline by 0.22%). Through analysis, the previ-
‡Correspondingauthor:luanjian78@hotmail.com ousparadigmhastwoflaws.Firstly,thecontext-independent
Copyright©2023,AssociationfortheAdvancementofArtificial features obtained by the PLM are fairly abstract, and thus
Intelligence(www.aaai.org).Allrightsreserved. pose obstacles to analyzing contextual information and di-
3202
naJ
71
]LC.sc[
1v54760.1032:viXra
alogue structure information. Secondly, the separation of 2 RelatedWork
fine-tuning step and training step leads to extra difficulty
2.1 EmotionRecognitioninConversation
in modelling these two kinds of information. Considering
these issues, EmoBERTa (Kim and Vossen 2021) discards ERC has received extensive attention in the past decades
the second step and uses entire contexts of the query utter- givenitswideapplications.Mostexistingalgorithmsfollow
ancewhenfine-tuning.However,itlacksfurtherreflections a fixed paradigm that can be generalized as first producing
onthewaytoadaptthefine-tuningprocesstotheERCtask. context-independentfeaturesandthenanalyzingcontextual
Thus, we raise several questions: How to use these three information and dialogue structure information. Basically,
kindsofinformationwhenfine-tuning?Howtooptimizethe these methods can be divided into two groups: recurrent-
fine-tuningprocessaccordingtothecharacteristicsofERC? basedmethodsandgraph-basedmethods.
Regarding the recurrent-based methods, HiGRU (Jiao
Motivatedbythesequestions,weproposeanewparadigm
et al. 2019a) uses two GRUs to explore utterance emotion
forERC:integratingqueryutteranceinformation,contextual
and conversation emotion, respectively. Moreover, Dialo-
information, and dialogue structure information when fine-
gRNN (Majumder et al. 2019) employs three GRUs to en-
tuning, and adapting the PLM to the ERC task in terms of
codecontextstate,speakerstate,andemotionstate,respec-
inputtext,classificationstructureandtrainingstrategy.The
tively.COSMIC(Ghosaletal.2020)isthelatestrecurrent-
comparison between the proposed paradigm and the pre-
basedalgorithm,whichintroducesexternalknowledgeinto
vious one is shown in Figure 1. Furthermore, we develop
DialogRNNtoachievebetterperformance.
ourmodelBERT-ERCaccordingtotheproposedparadigm,
which promotes performance in three aspects, namely sug- For the graph-based methods, DialogGCN (Ghosal et al.
gestive text, fine-grained classification module, and two- 2019b) treats the conversation as a directed graph, where
stage training. (1) Regarding suggestive text, we use the each utterance is connected with the contexts. Differently,
utterances within a certain distance from the query utter- DAG-ERC (Shen et al. 2021) uses a directed acyclic
anceandseveralindicativetokens,suchasspeakernameand graph to model the dialogue, where each utterance only
<mask>,toformtheinputtext,therebyindicatingspeaker receives information from the past utterances. Besides,
information and highlighting the query utterance emotion. some methods apply Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017),
(2)Thefine-grainedclassificationmoduleconsidersthetem- in which self-attention can be viewed as a graph. Specifi-
poral structure (past-query-future) of the conversation and cally, KET (Zhong, Wang, and Miao 2019) combines extra
generates position-aware features. (3) Concerning the two- knowledge and transformer encoder to boost performance.
stagetraining,wefirsttrainacoarseteachermodelviafine- DialogXL (Shen et al. 2020) adapts the transformer to the
tuning the PLM with the above strategies. Then, we ex- ERCtaskviadialog-awareself-attention.
plicitly interpolate the predictions into the input text of the Unliketheabovemethods,EmoBERTa(KimandVossen
finestudentmodel,allowingittoobtaincontextualemotion 2021)feedsthecontextsofthequeryutteranceintothePLM
state.Comparedtoexistingalgorithms,bothteachermodel andexplorescontextualinformationwhenfine-tuning.
andstudentmodelachievesubstantialimprovementonfour
datasets,indicatingtheeffectivenessofthesestrategies. 2.2 Fine-tuningMethods
Inadditiontoachievinghigheraccuracy,wenotethecon- GiventheeffectivenessofPLMs,researcherstypicallyadapt
straintsofERCinapplications,whichareignoredbyprevi- them to downstream tasks via fine-tuning for better per-
ousworks.Thus,weconductextensiveapplicabilityexper- formance.Throughourresearch,existingfine-tuningmeth-
imentsandadaptourparadigmtodifferentscenes.Specifi- ods can be divided into three groups: text-based methods,
cally,wesetupthelimitedresourcescenarioandtheonline structure-basedmethodsanddistillation-basedmethods.
prediction scenario to approximate real-world scenes. For Fortext-basedmethods,Prompt(Kumaretal.2016;Mc-
the former, we design a concise input text structure based Cann et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2019; Schick and Schu¨tze
on the speaker information to promote the performance of 2020) allows the similar structure between the input text
limited-scalePLMs.Forthelatter,wechoosethelarge-scale of the downstream task and pretraining task. For example,
PLMandtiny-scalePLMasthecoarseteacherandfinestu- when analyzing the emotion of “Alice: I did well in the
dentrespectivelytomeetthereal-timerequirement. exam”,wemayattachtheprompt“Alicefelt<mask>”.The
Overall,ourcontributionscanbesummarizedasfollows: <mask>tokenenablesthePLMtoworkinafamiliarsetting
(1)WerevealthelimitationsofthepreviousERCparadigm and thus improves its performance in the downstream task.
withapilotexperiment.(2)Weproposeanewparadigmfor Inspired by Prompt, we design the suggestive text, which
ERC:integratingthreeinfluencingfactorswhenfine-tuning, indicatesthedialoguestructureviaspecialtokens.
and adapting the PLM to the ERC task in terms of input Structure-based methods facilitate fine-tuning mainly in
text, classification structure, and training strategy. (3) We two ways: introducing external knowledge and enabling
develop a new model in three aspects, namely suggestive parameter-efficient transfer learning. For the former, K-
text,fine-grainedclassificationmodule,andtwo-stagetrain- BERT (Liu et al. 2020) injects expertise into the PLM by
ing.Moreover,itoutperformsexistingmethodsandachieves constraining the self-attention module with a knowledge
the accuracy of 71.70% on IEMOCAP, 67.11% on MELD, graph. Besides, prefix tuning (Li and Liang 2021) utilizes
61.42%onDailyDialog,39.84%onEmoryNLP.(4)Wecon- adomainwordinitializedmoduletoemphasizethekeycon-
ductnumerousapplicabilityexperimentsandadaptthepro- tent of the downstream task. For the latter, Adapter tun-
posedparadigmtodifferentscenarios. ing (Houlsby et al. 2019) attaches small neural modules to
Figure1:(a)InfluencingfactorsinERC.(b)DifferentparadigmsforERC.
each layer of the PLM. Moreover, LoRA (Hu et al. 2021) structure information) during fine-tuning, and adapting the
proposes trainable rank decomposition matrices to reduce PLM to the ERC task in terms of input text, classification
trainableparameters.Inourwork,wedesignaclassification structureandtrainingstrategy.Inotherwords,weselectthe
structurebasedonthecharacteristicsoftheERCtask. mostappropriate(X,M,S)indifferentscenarios.Accord-
Concerningdistillation-basedmethods,theyaimtomax- ingtotheproposedparadigm,wedevelopourmodelBERT-
imally compress PLM size at the cost of limited perfor- ERC in three aspects: suggestive text, fine-grained classi-
manceloss.Specifically,TINYBERT(Jiaoetal.2019b)pro- fication module, and two-stage training. Details of these
poses a two-stage distillation framework for transformer- strategieswillbepresentedasfollows.
based models. Besides, DistilBERT (Sanh et al. 2019) puts
forwardalighterBERT(Devlinetal.2018)viatheknowl- 3.2 SuggestiveText
edge distillation strategy. However, they regard distillation Let [(u ,s ),...,(u ,s )] denote the conversation, and x
1 1 N N i
loss as the only knowledge transfer pathway. Unlike the represents the input text of the query utterance u . Tra-
i
above methods, we shift our focus on promoting the per- ditional algorithms only feed the query utterance into the
formance of the student model and transfer knowledge via PLM, i.e., x = u , which proved to be a suboptimal strat-
i i
theinputtextofthestudentmodelforthefirsttime. egy.Thus,weuseutteranceswithinacertaindistancefrom
the query utterance to form the input text. Nonetheless, di-
3 Methodology rectly splicing different utterances probably yields negligi-
bleimprovement,asthePLMcomprehendslimitedknowl-
3.1 TaskDefinition
edge of dialogue structure in pretraining. Accordingly, we
Given a dialogue script along with the speaker information
explicitlyintroducedialoguestructureinformationandcon-
about each constituent utterance, ERC aims to analyze the
textualinformationintotheinputtext:
sentiment of each utterance from a predefined set of emo-
x =[X (u ,s ),...,X (u ,s ),
tions.Let[(u ,s ),...,(u ,s )]denoteaconversationcon- i p a a p i 1 i 1
1 1 N N − −
tainingN utterances,wheres
i
representsthespeakerofu i. X q(u i,s i), (1)
AsillustratedinFigure2,givenanutteranceu i,theobjectof X f(u i+1,s i+1),...,X f(u b,s b)]
ERCistopredictitsemotionlabely Y accordingtothe
contexts [u ,...,u ] and the correspi o∈ nding speaker infor- wherea,bdenotetherangeofthecontexts,X p,X q,andX f
1 N denotethecorrespondingstrategyforpastutterances,query
mation,whereY denotestheemotionset.Inadditiontothe
utterance, and future utterances. We provide an example in
offline prediction, we also investigate online ERC (OERC)
Figure2,anddetailswillbepresentedasfollows.
forpracticalneeds.AsshowninFigure3,givenanutterance
Regarding X , we exploit three kinds of special tokens.
u , OERC predicts the emotion label y Y based on the q
i i ∈ Firstly,weplacespeakersays:aheadofthequeryutterance
precedingutterances[u ,...,u ]andspeakerinformation.
1 i to provide speaker information. Secondly, <s> and </s>
Inthispaper,wedefinetheERCtaskasP(Y X,M,S),
| are employed to enclose the query utterance for emphasis.
where Y,X,M,S denote predictions, input text generation
Thirdly,weapplythe<mask>tokentofocusthemodelon
approach,PLM,andtrainingstrategyrespectively.Further-
theemotionstateofthequeryutterance.Inotherwords,the
more, we design a new paradigm for ERC, which can be
suggestivequeryutterancecanbeexpressedby:
summarized as integrating three influencing factors (query
X (u ,s ) = <s>s <mask>says:u </s> (2)
utteranceinformation,contextualinformation,anddialogue q i i i i
Figure2:ThepipelineofBERT-ERC.
ForX andX ,speakersays:servesastheonlyindication into past tokens, query tokens, and future tokens based on
p f
giventhesupportingroleofthecontexts: theposition.Then,pastfeaturesF ,queryfeaturesF ,and
p q
futurefeaturesF aregeneratedviameanoperation:
X (u ,s ) = s says:u (3) f
p j j j j
X (u ,s ) = s says:u (4) F = mean([f ,...,f ]) (8)
f j j j j p 1 a 1
−
We denote the above method as multi-speaker aggregation, F q = mean([f a,...,f b]) (9)
asitinvolvesallcontextswithinacertaindistancefromthe F = mean([f ,...,f ]) (10)
f b+1 l
queryutterance.However,limited-scalePLMsstillperform
poorly in modelling contextual information and dialogue Afterwards, we get the concatenated feature F cls =
structure information even with these special tokens. Con- [F p,F q,F f], which contains both principal-subordinate
sideringthatutterancesofthesamespeakerasthequeryone structureinformationandtemporalstructureinformation.
can better reflect the emotion state of the speaker, we pro- Similar to the processing of the class token, a fully con-
pose single-speaker aggregation, thereby reducing the task nectedlayerfollowedbytheTanhactivationfunctionisuti-
to exploring the mood swings of a specific speaker. For- lizedforprojection.Finally,weusetheDropout(Srivastava
mally,letXs,Xs,andXsdenotethecorrespondingstrategy etal.2014)layertopreventoverfittingandtheMLPforclas-
p q f
for the three kinds of utterances in single-speaker aggrega- sification.Inotherwords,predictionyˆ icanbecomputedby:
tion.Thus,theaggregatedinputtextcanbeexpressedby:
yˆ =MLP(Dropout(Tanh(FC(F )))) (11)
i cls
Xs(u ,s ) = <s>s <mask>says:u </s> (5)
q i i i i
X ps(u j,s j) = s j says:u j ifs j ==s ielseNone (6) 3.4 Two-stageTraining
X fs(u j,s j) = s j says:u j ifs j ==s ielseNone (7) Giventhesignificanceofcontextualemotionstate,existing
algorithmsimplicitlyexploititviamodellingdialoguestruc-
3.3 Fine-grainedClassificationModule tureinformation.Differently,theproposedparadigmmakes
Giventheinputtextx ofthequeryutteranceu ,PLMgen- it possible to explicitly introduce contextual emotion state
i i
erates the features of each constituent token. Traditional intotheinputtext.Inspiredbyknowledgedistillation(Hin-
fine-tuning methods generally utilize the class token for ton et al. 2015), we utilize the coarse teacher - fine stu-
classification, as the input of most tasks is a piece of text dentframework.Specifically,wefirsttrainateachermodel
without any special structures. However, x has principal- viafine-tuningthePLMwithaforementionedstrategiesand
i
subordinate structure (query utterance in leading position, theninterpolatethepredictionswithhighconfidenceintothe
contexts in supporting status) and temporal structure (past- input text of the student model. It is worth noting that the
query-future), indicating that the previous classifier is sub- two-stage training strategy imposes no constraints on the
optimal for our model. Accordingly, we propose a fine- two models. Accordingly, we test various combinations of
grainedclassificationmoduleaccordingtothetraitsofERC, PLMs to meet the requirements of different scenarios. The
whosedetailswillbepresentedasfollows. pipelineofthetwo-stagetrainingisshowninFigure2,and
Let[f ,...,f ]denotethefeaturesofx ,where[f ,...,f ] wewillillustrateitintermsofknowledge,framework,and
1 l i a b
correspond to the query tokens. We first divide the tokens combinationofdifferentPLMs.
Figure3:Two-stagetraininginOERCscenario.
Knowledge AccordingtotheemotionsetY oftheteacher Combination of Different PLMs As mentioned above,
model,wedividetheknowledgeintotaskdrivenknowledge we choose the combination of PLMs according to the ex-
andcommon-sense-basedknowledge.Fortheformer,Y in- perimental scenario. To achieve optimal accuracy, we use
cludes all classes involved in the task. In other words, the RoBERTa-large as the PLM of both teacher and student.
teacher model first completes the task and then transfers However, large-scale PLMs cannot meet the real-time re-
the predictions with high confidence as the knowledge to quirement of OERC, which is also a common issue in pre-
the student model. For the latter, we draw inspiration from vailingalgorithms.Tosolvethisproblem,wedivideOERC
the way humans perceive emotion state. Specifically, given intothespeakingstageandthepredictionstage.Themodel
thepredominanceofneutralemotionindailyconversations, isunoccupiedintheformerstage(3-5seconds),asitneeds
peoplefirstsimplifyERCasabinary(neutral,emotional)or the query utterance for emotion recognition. For the latter,
ternary (positive, neutral, negative) problem, and then con- the model is required to assess the emotion in 50-100 mil-
ductfurtherclassification.Similarly,theteachermodelcom- liseconds. Considering the long duration of the first stage,
pletesasimplifiedERCtaskandthenimpartsthepredictions theteacher-studentframeworkperfectlyfitsOERCscenario.
tothestudentmodeltoconductfine-grainedclassification. Specifically,inthespeakingstage,alarge-scalePLMisused
togeneratepastemotionstates.Then,inthepredictionstage,
Framework In two-stage training, we follow the coarse we use a tiny-scale PLM as the student to conduct online
teacher-finestudentframework.Firstly,theteachermodel
predictionbasedonthetextembeddedwithknowledge.
generates a pseudo label for each utterance and filters
out the low confidence predictions. For a given dialogue
[(u ,s ),...,(u ,s )], let yˆ denotes the prediction of u 4 Experiments
1 1 N N i i
andp representsthepredictionconfidenceofyˆ.Thus,the
i i
utterance i embedded with knowledge can be expressed by 4.1 Datasets
f(u ,s ,yˆ,p ),andf denotesthescreeningstrategy:
i i i i
Ourexperimentsinvolvefourdatasets,whoseinformationis
f(u ,s ,yˆ,p )=
(u i,s i,yˆ i) ifp
i
≥p
(12)
asfollows.IEMOCAP(Bussoetal.2008)isamulti-modal
i i i i (u ,s ) otherwise dataset, where each utterance is labelled with one of six
(cid:26) i i emotions, namely neutral, happiness, sadness, anger, frus-
where p is a hyperparameter in our model. Secondly, we trated,andexcited.Followingpreviousworks,dialoguesof
introduce the knowledge into the input text of the student the first four sessions are used as the training set and the
modelandchangethesuggestivetextstrategyofthestudent: rest are used as the test set. MELD (Poria et al. 2018) is a
multi-modaldatasetextractedfromtheTVshowFriends.It
X q(u i,s i,yˆ i) = <s>s i<mask>says:u i</s> (13) contains seven emotion labels: anger, disgust, fear, happi-
X p(u i,s i,yˆ i) = s i<emo>says:u i (14) ness, sadness, surprise, and neutral. DailyDialog (Li et al.
X (u ,s ,yˆ) = s <emo>says:u (15) 2017)collectsconversationsofEnglishlearners.Itincludes
f i i i i i
thesamesevenemotionlabelsasMELD.EmoryNLP(Za-
where <emo> corresponds to the emotion label of yˆ. For hiriandChoi2018)isalsobuiltontheTVshowFriends,but
i
example, we set <emo> to angrily if and only if yˆ de- differs from MELD in scenes and labels. It contains seven
i
notesanger.Insuchamanner,theexplicitlyindicatedcon- typesoflabels:neutral,sad,mad,scared,powerful,peace-
textual emotion states improve the performance of the stu- ful, and joyful. In our experiments, we only utilize textual
dentmodel.Intestphase,wefirstmakepredictionswiththe modality.Regardingevaluationmetrics,wefollowprevious
teachermodelandthengeneratetheknowledge,whichwill worksandchoosemicro-averagedF1excludingneutralfor
beimpartedtothestudentforrefinedpredictions. DailyDialogandweighted-averageF1fortherestdatasets.
Method IEMOCAP MELD DailyDialog EmoryNLP
DialogRNN+RoBERTa(Majumderetal.2019) 64.76 63.61 57.32 37.44
DialogGCN+RoBERTa(Ghosaletal.2019b) 64.91 63.02 57.52 38.10
RGAT+RoBERTa(Ishiwatarietal.2020) 66.36 62.80 58.08 37.78
KET(Zhong,Wang,andMiao2019) 59.56 58.18 53.37 33.95
DialogXL(Shenetal.2020) 65.94 62.41 54.93 34.73
DAGNN(Shenetal.2021) 64.61 63.12 58.36 37.98
COSMIC(Ghosaletal.2020) 65.28 65.21 58.48 38.11
DAG-ERC(Shenetal.2021) 68.03 63.65 59.33 39.02
EmoBERTa(KimandVossen2021) 68.57 65.61 - -
CoMPM(LeeandLee2021) 69.46 66.52 60.34 38.93
T-GCN(LeeandChoi2021) - 65.36 61.91 39.24
BERT-ERC(teacher) 69.43 66.15 60.71 39.73
BERT-ERC(student) 70.84 66.65 61.42 39.84
BERT-ERC(best) 71.70 67.11 61.42 39.84
Table2:Comparisonwiththestate-of-the-artmethodsonfourdatasets(%).
4.2 ImplementationDetails based on the context-independent features. Through com-
Weconductexperimentsinthreeapplicationscenarios.For parison, algorithms using contexts when fine-tuning (lines
offlineprediction(Section4.3),wefixallparametersettings 9-14) outperform traditional methods, suggesting the sig-
andassessourmodelonfourdatasets.Moreover,inSection nificance of exploring contextual information and dialogue
4.4and4.5,weconductexperimentsonIEMOCAPinlim- structure information in the extraction stage. Moreover,
ited resources scenario and OERC scenario to approximate comparedtoEmoBERTa(KimandVossen2021),ourmodel
real-worldscenesrespectively.Detailsareasfollows. achieves substantial improvement as we adapt the fine-
Regarding offline prediction, the proposed model pre- tuningprocesstotheERCtask.Concurrently,CoMPM(Lee
dicts the emotion of each utterance with sufficient time, andLee2021)andT-GCN(LeeandChoi2021)insertcon-
space and computational resources. To achieve the optimal textual information into PLMs by extra models. Nonethe-
performance,weuseRoBERTa-large(Liuetal.2019)with less,BERT-ERCstillleadsinmostcases,whichmainlyben-
the first 8 encoder layers frozen as the PLM. Moreover, efitsfromthesuggestivetextandthefineclassifier.Further-
weutilizethemulti-speakeraggregationandsettheknowl- more,weusethetwo-stagetrainingstrategytogeneratethe
edge confidence p to 0.7. For the limited resources sce- finestudentmodelinline13,whichoutperformsthecoarse
nario,suchasmobiledevices,duetothelimitationsofspace teacherinalldatasets,indicatingthatproperknowledgecan
and computational resources, we have to use limited-scale furtherboosttheperformanceofourparadigm.Besides,we
models. Besides, we expect more frozen parameters when usea2-layerMLPastheclassifieronIEMOCAPandfreeze
fine-tuningforparameterreuse.Thus,wechooseRoBERTa- more PLM layers on MELD to achieve the optimal perfor-
base (Liu et al. 2019) with the first 6 or 10 encoder layers mance on these two datasets (line 14). Overall, our model
frozenasthePLM.ConcerningOERC,toexploitthetime achievesleadingperformanceonfourdatasets,demonstrat-
inthespeakingstage,weuseRoBERTa-largewiththefirst8 ingtheadvantagesoftheproposedparadigm.
layersfrozenasthePLMoftheteacher.Besides,weemploy
BERT-tiny(Turcetal.2019)andBERT-medium(Turcetal. Ablation Study We design an ablation study on IEMO-
2019)asthePLMofthestudent.Moreover,wesetpto0.5. CAP to diagnose the proposed modules, whose results are
Scenario-independent settings are listed as follows. We shown in Table 3. (1) The baseline model uses the query
truncate the input text to meet the requirement of PLMs. utteranceastheinputandemploystheclasstokenforclas-
We use the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba 2014) with sification. (2) The <mask> token emphasizes the emotion
a learning rate of 9e-6 in experiments. Besides, we utilize state of the query utterance and improves the performance
a 1-layer MLP as the classifier unless otherwise specified. by 0.76%. (3) We get the improvement of 10.83% via the
For all datasets, we train 10 epochs with the batch size of contexts of the query utterance, demonstrating that explor-
8. Focal Loss (Lin et al. 2017) is applied to alleviate the ing contextual information and dialogue structure informa-
classimbalanceproblem.Weimplementallexperimentson tion in the fine-tuning step is the most critical strategy in
4NVIDIATeslaV100GPUswiththePytorchframework. ERC.(4)FCM(line4)furthergainstheprogressof0.88%,
which can be credited to the introduced dialogue structure.
4.3 OfflinePredictionScenario (5)InspiredbyViT(Dosovitskiyetal.2020),webelievethat
Comparison with the State-of-the-Art Methods We 2-layerclassificationMLPoutperforms1-layerMLPinhigh
compare BERT-ERC with several state-of-the-art methods quality datasets. Compared to the latter, the former obtains
on four datasets in Table 2. The first 8 lines present the theimprovementof1.72%.(6)Comparedtotheteacher,the
performanceofseveraltraditionalalgorithms,whichmodel finestudentmodelachievestheimprovementof0.55%,sug-
contextual information and dialogue structure information gestingtheeffectivenessofthetwo-stagetraining.
<mask> contexts FCM 2-layerMLP two-stagetraining IEMOCAP
56.96
X 57.72
X X 68.55
X X X 69.43
X X X X 71.15
X X X X X 71.70
Table3:AblationstudyonIEMOCAP(%).(FCM:Fine-grainedclassificationmodule)
Method IEMOCAP Acc(%) PLM
DialogRNN+RoBERTa-large 64.76 BERT-tiny BERT-medium
DialogRNN+RoBERTa-base 62.75 Method
DialogGCN+RoBERTa-large 64.91 MSA+C 42.58 61.64
DialogGCN+RoBERTa-base 64.18 MSA+K+C 48.22 69.62
RGAT+RoBERTa-large 66.36 SSA+K+C 56.27 69.02
RGAT+RoBERTa-base 65.22 SSA+K 63.27 68.37
BERT-ERC+RoBERTa-large+MSA 69.43
Table 5: Performance comparison on IEMOCAP in OERC
BERT-ERC+RoBERTa-base(fr6)+MSA 66.87
scenario (%). (MSA: multi-speaker aggregation; SSA:
BERT-ERC+RoBERTa-base(fr6)+SSA 68.98
single-speakeraggregation;K:knowledge;C:contexts)
BERT-ERC+RoBERTa-base(fr10)+MSA 63.22
BERT-ERC+RoBERTa-base(fr10)+SSA 66.16
Table 4: Performance comparison on IEMOCAP in the encerespectively.TheexperimentalresultsareshowninTa-
limited resources scenario (%). (MSA: multi-speaker ag- ble 5. Baseline model does not use the knowledge (line 1)
gregation;SSA:single-speakeraggregation;RoBERTa-base and fails to meet practical needs. Compared to the base-
(frn):RoBERTa-basewiththefirstnlayersfrozen;) line,two-stagetrainingintroducescontextualemotionstate
astheknowledge(line2)andpromotestheperformanceby
5.64% and 7.98%. It is worth noting that BERT-medium
4.4 LimitedResourcesScenario with teacher achieves 3 faster inference while still out-
×
performingthestate-of-the-artmethodsinofflineprediction
To approximate the scene of conducting ERC on mobile
scenario.TofurtherboosttheperformanceofBERT-tiny,we
devices, we set up the limited resources scenario and con-
utilize single-speaker aggregation (line 3) and achieve the
duct experiments in Table 4. According to the first 6 lines,
improvementof8.05%.Furthermore,wesimplifytheinput
limited-scalePLMshazardexistingalgorithms,possiblydue
textbyreplacingtheprecedingutteranceswiththerevealed
tothereducedmodellingcapability.Besides,ourmodelsuf-
emotion states and achieves an accuracy of 63.27% with
fersfromamoresevereperformancedrop,asitisbuilten-
BERT-tiny. Reviewing the strategies in line 2 to 4, we dis-
tirelyonthePLM.However,BERT-ERCwithasmallPLM
cover that simpler input text advances limited-scale PLMs.
stilloutperformsmostpreviousworks,suggestingthatinte-
However,thesetwostrategiesfailtobenefitBERT-medium,
gratingqueryutteranceinformation,contextualinformation
as it has sufficient parameters to model dialogue structure
and dialogue structure information when fine-tuning is the
and past utterances. Overall, the proposed two-stage train-
mostcriticalstrategyinERC.Moreover,single-speakerag-
ing strategy yields great inference speed gains with limited
gregation (line 9) obtains the progress of 2.11% compared
accuracy loss and achieves great performance on different
tomulti-speakeraggregation(line8),indicatingthatfocus-
PLMswiththecorrespondingtextgenerationapproach.
ingonlyonthemoodswingsofonespeakerimprovesERC
performanceintheresource-limitedcondition.Besides,we
5 Conclusion
freeze the first 10 layers of RoBERTa-base for more pa-
rameter reuse and achieve the accuracy of 66.16% with Given the flaws of the previous ERC paradigm, we put
single-speakeraggregation,whichiscomparabletotheper- forward a new one in this paper and further develop the
formance of existing methods. Insofar as we know, we are BERT-ERCmodelaccordingtotheproposedparadigm.Our
thefirsttoconsiderPLMsizeandparameterreuseinERC, modelutilizesthreestrategies(suggestivetext,fine-grained
andresultsshowthatourparadigmcanbeadaptedtovarious classification module, and two-stage training) to introduce
scenariosbyalteringthetextgenerationstrategy. dialogue structure information and contextual information
into the PLM. Through extensive experiments, BERT-ERC
4.5 OERC achieves state-of-the-art performance on four datasets. Be-
InOERCscenario,wechooseRoBERTa-largeasthecoarse sides, we set up the limited resources scenario and OERC
teacher and use BERT-tiny and BERT-medium as the fine scenariotoapproximatereal-worldscenes.Overall,compre-
student.Turcetal.(Turcetal.2019)pointoutthatthesetwo hensive experiments demonstrate the generalization ability
PLMsare3 and65 fasterthanRoBERTa-largeininfer- andeffectivenessoftheproposedparadigm.
× ×
6 Acknowledgments Jiao,W.;Yang,H.;King,I.;andLyu,M.R.2019a. Higru:
Hierarchical gated recurrent units for utterance-level emo-
WewouldliketothanktheintelligentvoiceassistantXiaoAi
tionrecognition. arXivpreprintarXiv:1904.04446.
andtheXiaomiAILabfortheirguidanceandinspirationto
ouremotionconversationwork. Jiao, X.; Yin, Y.; Shang, L.; Jiang, X.; Chen, X.; Li,
L.; Wang, F.; and Liu, Q. 2019b. Tinybert: Distilling
bert for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
References
arXiv:1909.10351.
Busso,C.;Bulut,M.;Lee,C.-C.;Kazemzadeh,A.;Mower,
Kim,T.;andVossen,P.2021. EmoBERTa:Speaker-Aware
E.; Kim, S.; Chang, J. N.; Lee, S.; and Narayanan, S. S.
EmotionRecognitioninConversationwithRoBERTa.arXiv
2008. IEMOCAP:Interactiveemotionaldyadicmotioncap-
preprintarXiv:2108.12009.
ture database. Language resources and evaluation, 42(4):
Kingma, D. P.; and Ba, J. 2014. Adam: A method for
335–359.
stochasticoptimization. arXivpreprintarXiv:1412.6980.
Chung,J.;Gulcehre,C.;Cho,K.;andBengio,Y.2014. Em-
Kumar,A.;Irsoy,O.;Ondruska,P.;Iyyer,M.;Bradbury,J.;
piricalevaluationofgatedrecurrentneuralnetworksonse-
Gulrajani, I.; Zhong, V.; Paulus, R.; and Socher, R. 2016.
quencemodeling. arXivpreprintarXiv:1412.3555.
Ask me anything: Dynamic memory networks for natural
Devlin,J.;Chang,M.-W.;Lee,K.;andToutanova,K.2018. language processing. In International conference on ma-
Bert:Pre-trainingofdeepbidirectionaltransformersforlan- chinelearning,1378–1387.PMLR.
guageunderstanding. arXivpreprintarXiv:1810.04805.
Lee, B.; and Choi, Y. S. 2021. Graph based network with
Dosovitskiy, A.; Beyer, L.; Kolesnikov, A.; Weissenborn, contextualized representations of turns in dialogue. arXiv
D.; Zhai, X.; Unterthiner, T.; Dehghani, M.; Minderer, M.; preprintarXiv:2109.04008.
Heigold,G.;Gelly,S.;etal.2020. Animageisworth16x16
Lee, J.; and Lee, W. 2021. CoMPM: Context Mod-
words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv
eling with Speaker’s Pre-trained Memory Tracking for
preprintarXiv:2010.11929.
Emotion Recognition in Conversation. arXiv preprint
Gao, J.; Liu, Y.; Deng, H.; Wang, W.; Cao, Y.; Du, J.; and arXiv:2108.11626.
Xu, R. 2021. Improving Empathetic Response Genera-
Li, X. L.; and Liang, P. 2021. Prefix-tuning: Optimiz-
tion by Recognizing Emotion Cause in Conversations. In
ing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv preprint
EMNLP.
arXiv:2101.00190.
Ghosal, D.; Majumder, N.; Gelbukh, A.; Mihalcea, R.; and
Li, Y.; Li, K.; Ning, H.; Xia, X.; Guo, Y.; Wei, C.; Cui, J.;
Poria, S. 2020. COSMIC: COmmonSense knowledge for
andWang,B.2021. TowardsanOnlineEmpatheticChatbot
eMotion identification in conversations. arXiv preprint
withEmotionCauses.Proceedingsofthe44thInternational
arXiv:2010.02795.
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Ghosal, D.; Majumder, N.; Poria, S.; Chhaya, N.; and Gel- InformationRetrieval.
bukh, A. 2019a. DialogueGCN: A Graph Convolutional
Li, Y.; Su, H.; Shen, X.; Li, W.; Cao, Z.; and Niu, S.
Neural Network for Emotion Recognition in Conversation.
2017. Dailydialog:Amanuallylabelledmulti-turndialogue
InEMNLP.
dataset. arXivpreprintarXiv:1710.03957.
Ghosal, D.; Majumder, N.; Poria, S.; Chhaya, N.; and Gel- Lin, T.-Y.; Goyal, P.; Girshick, R.; He, K.; and Dolla´r, P.
bukh, A. 2019b. Dialoguegcn: A graph convolutional neu- 2017. Focallossfordenseobjectdetection. InProceedings
ralnetworkforemotionrecognitioninconversation. arXiv of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
preprintarXiv:1908.11540. 2980–2988.
Hinton, G.; Vinyals, O.; Dean, J.; et al. 2015. Distill- Liu,W.;Zhou,P.;Zhao,Z.;Wang,Z.;Ju,Q.;Deng,H.;and
ing the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint Wang, P. 2020. K-bert: Enabling language representation
arXiv:1503.02531,2(7). withknowledgegraph. InProceedingsoftheAAAIConfer-
Houlsby, N.; Giurgiu, A.; Jastrzebski, S.; Morrone, B.; enceonArtificialIntelligence,volume34,2901–2908.
De Laroussilhe, Q.; Gesmundo, A.; Attariyan, M.; and Liu, Y.; Ott, M.; Goyal, N.; Du, J.; Joshi, M.; Chen, D.;
Gelly, S. 2019. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for Levy, O.; Lewis, M.; Zettlemoyer, L.; and Stoyanov, V.
NLP. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
2790–2799.PMLR. proach. arXivpreprintarXiv:1907.11692.
Hu,E.J.;Shen,Y.;Wallis,P.;Allen-Zhu,Z.;Li,Y.;Wang, Majumder, N.; Poria, S.; Hazarika, D.; Mihalcea, R.; Gel-
S.;Wang,L.;andChen,W.2021.Lora:Low-rankadaptation bukh, A.; and Cambria, E. 2019. Dialoguernn: An atten-
oflargelanguagemodels.arXivpreprintarXiv:2106.09685. tivernnforemotiondetectioninconversations. InProceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
Ishiwatari,T.;Yasuda,Y.;Miyazaki,T.;andGoto,J.2020.
ume33,6818–6825.
Relation-awaregraphattentionnetworkswithrelationalpo-
sition encodings for emotion recognition in conversations. McCann,B.;Keskar,N.S.;Xiong,C.;andSocher,R.2018.
InProceedingsofthe2020ConferenceonEmpiricalMeth- Thenaturallanguagedecathlon:Multitasklearningasques-
odsinNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP),7360–7370. tionanswering. arXivpreprintarXiv:1806.08730.
Poria, S.; Hazarika, D.; Majumder, N.; Naik, G.; Cambria,
E.; and Mihalcea, R. 2018. Meld: A multimodal multi-
partydatasetforemotionrecognitioninconversations.arXiv
preprintarXiv:1810.02508.
Poria, S.; Majumder, N.; Mihalcea, R.; and Hovy, E. H.
2019. Emotion Recognition in Conversation: Research
Challenges, Datasets, and Recent Advances. IEEE Access,
7:100943–100953.
Radford, A.; Wu, J.; Child, R.; Luan, D.; Amodei, D.;
Sutskever,I.;etal.2019.Languagemodelsareunsupervised
multitasklearners. OpenAIblog,1(8):9.
Sanh,V.;Debut,L.;Chaumond,J.;andWolf,T.2019. Dis-
tilBERT,adistilledversionofBERT:smaller,faster,cheaper
andlighter. arXivpreprintarXiv:1910.01108.
Schick, T.; and Schu¨tze, H. 2020. Exploiting cloze ques-
tions for few shot text classification and natural language
inference. arXivpreprintarXiv:2001.07676.
Shen, W.; Chen, J.; Quan, X.; and Xie, Z. 2020. Dialogxl:
All-in-onexlnetformulti-partyconversationemotionrecog-
nition. arXivpreprintarXiv:2012.08695.
Shen, W.; Wu, S.; Yang, Y.; and Quan, X. 2021. Directed
acyclic graph network for conversational emotion recogni-
tion. arXivpreprintarXiv:2105.12907.
Srivastava,N.;Hinton,G.;Krizhevsky,A.;Sutskever,I.;and
Salakhutdinov, R. 2014. Dropout: a simple way to prevent
neural networks from overfitting. The journal of machine
learningresearch,15(1):1929–1958.
Turc, I.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; and Toutanova, K. 2019.
Well-read students learn better: On the importance of pre-
trainingcompactmodels. arXivpreprintarXiv:1908.08962.
Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones,
L.;Gomez,A.N.;Kaiser,Ł.;andPolosukhin,I.2017. At-
tentionisallyouneed. Advancesinneuralinformationpro-
cessingsystems,30.
Zahiri,S.M.;andChoi,J.D.2018. Emotiondetectionontv
show transcripts with sequence-based convolutional neural
networks.InWorkshopsatthethirty-secondaaaiconference
onartificialintelligence.
Zhong, P.; Wang, D.; and Miao, C. 2019. Knowledge-
enriched transformer for emotion detection in textual con-
versations. arXivpreprintarXiv:1909.10681.
A ComponentAnalysis RandomSeed 0 1 2 3
with<mask> 39.73 38.46 40.03 39.11
Through extensive experiments, BERT-ERC achieves the
without<mask> 10.94 38.47 36.97 10.94
best available results on four datasets. In this part, we ex-
plorewaystoadaptourmodeltodifferentdatasetsinterms
Table 1: Ablation Study (%) of the <mask> token on
ofknowledge,modellingcapabilityand<mask>token.
EmoryNLP.
A.1 Knowledge
IEMOCAP MELD
As mentioned in Section 3.4.1, we propose task driven Methods
mean std mean std
knowledgeandcommon-sense-basedknowledge.Forclass-
BERT-ERC(teacher) 70.41 0.63 66.01 0.21
balanceddatasetswithconsistentdistributionbetweentrain-
BERT-ERC(student) 71.12 0.56 66.26 0.33
ing set and test set, such as IEMOCAP, task driven knowl-
BERT-ERC(best) 71.53 0.21 66.89 0.27
edge outperforms common-sense-based knowledge. More-
over, in EmoryNLP, where the distribution of the training
Table2:StabilityanalysisofBERT-ERC(%).
set and test set is inconsistent, we first complete a ternary
ERCtasktopreventoverfitting.Besides,indailyconversa-
tions,suchasDailyDialogandMELD,whereneutralemo-
on IEMOCAP and MELD. Specifically, we choose 5 ran-
tionpredominates,identifyingitfirstyieldsoptimalperfor-
dom seeds (0 - 4) and take the average and standard de-
mance.ResultsinSection4.3.1indicatethatthestudentwith
viation as the measurement. Moreover, the models (BERT-
appropriateknowledgeachievesgreatimprovement.
ERC(teacher),BERT-ERC(student),BERT-ERC(best))in-
volvedinthisexperimentremainthesameasthoseinSec-
A.2 ModellingCapability
tion4.3.1.AstheresultsinTable2illustrate,ourmodelcon-
Traditional ERC algorithms balance overfitting and under- sistently outperforms existing ERC algorithms in multiple
fitting by altering the complexity of the model. Differ- turns,indicatingitseffectivenessandstability.
ently, in our paradigm, we adjust the modelling capability
via changing the number of frozen layers and MLP lay- C Discussion
ers. As illustrated in the ablation study, 2-layer classifica-
tion MLP outperforms 1-layer MLP in IEMOCAP, as the C.1 TimeandComputationalResources
stronger representation capability contributes to the perfor-
The proposed paradigm utilizes the contexts of the query
mance in high quality dataset. In addition, reducing pa-
utterance in the fine-tuning step, thus leading to intensive
rameters facilitates the generalization ability in low quality
computation.Tosolvethisproblem,weputforwardseveral
datasets. Specifically, in MELD, we freeze the first 16 lay-
methods. (1) We demonstrate the effectiveness of single-
ersoftheRoBERTa-largeandobtaintheprogressof0.96%
speakeraggregationinthelimitedresourcescenarioinSec-
(67.11%) compared to the RoBERTa-large with the first 8
tion 4.4, which enables concise input text. (2) We utilize a
layersfrozen(66.15%).
large-scale PLM and a tiny-scale PLM as the teacher and
student, respectively, to meet the real-time requirement of
A.3 <mask>Token
OERC. However, these methods are not enough to elimi-
Wehavedemonstratedtheeffectivenessofthe<mask>to- nate the computational burden introduced by the contexts.
ken in the ablation study. Practically, its effect becomes Inspired by the success of the SSA + K mode on BERT-
more pronounced as the task becomes more difficult. In tiny in Section 4.6, the future work lies in the following
Table 1, we conduct an ablation study of the <mask> to- aspects.Firstly,wewillexploremethodsinwhichthetiny-
ken on EmoryNLP, which serves as the most challenging scale PLM transfers knowledge to itself. Secondly, we will
dataset.Asresultsillustrate,themodelconfrontsinstability further improve the strategy of replacing the contexts with
andfittingproblemswithoutthe<mask>token.Moreover, the pseudo-labels and reduce the performance loss caused
italsoplaysanimportantroleinOERC.Specifically,thestu- bythismethod.
dentmodelwithout<mask>tokensuffersadropof1.02%.
Throughanalysis,the<mask>tokenbenefitsthemodelin C.2 ErrorStudy
twoaspects.Firstly,intwo-stagetraining,itallowsthesim-
Reviewingthepredictionresults,ourmodelperformspoorly
ilar sentence structure between the query utterance and the
in two situations, namely ambiguous emotion and emotion
preceding utterances in the student model, thereby empha-
shift.
sizingthepastemotionstateindicatedbythepseudolabels.
For the former, BERT-ERC (teacher) fails to accurately
Secondly,itdirectlyfocusesthemodelontheemotionstate
differentiatesimilaremotions,suchashappinessvsexcited,
ofthequeryutteranceandfacilitatesstabletraining.
peaceful vs neutral, and anger vs frustrated. Moreover,
distinguishing other emotions from neutral in the datasets
B StabilityAnalysis
where the neutral emotion predominates is also a struggle.
Regarding all the aforementioned experiments, we set the We believe that the proposed common-sense-based knowl-
random seed to 0 so as to facilitate reproduction. In this edgealleviatestheseissuestosomeextent,andtheimproved
section, we investigate the stability of the proposed model student performance also supports our idea. Moreover, fu-
3202
naJ
71
]LC.sc[
1v54760.1032:viXra
Figure1:VisualizationofseveralutterancesintheIEMOCAPdataset.
IEMOCAP MELD DailyDialog EmoryNLP
Methods
ES woES ES woES ES woES ES woES
DialogRNN 47.50 69.20 - - - - - -
DialogXL 55.00 - - - - - - -
DAG-ERC 57.98 74.25 59.02 69.45 57.26 59.25 37.29 42.10
BERT-ERC(teacher) 59.38 77.64 60.02 73.52 66.27 60.13 37.59 44.32
Table3:Testaccuracyofseveralmodelswithandwithoutemotionshift(%).(ES:emotionshift;woES:withoutemotionshift)
tureworkonthisissuecanalsoattempttoincorporatepsy- inFigure1.Furtheranalysisisasfollows.
chologicalexpertise.
Regardingutterance(a,1),bothmodelsmakethecorrect
Forthelatter,emotionshiftisagreatchallengeintheERC predictionofthespeakeremotion.However,DAG-ERCfails
task, which means the emotions of two consecutive utter- to understand the emotion change from utterance (a, 1) to
ances from the same speaker are different. Existing ERC utterance (a, 2) and thus makes a wrong judgement, while
algorithms generally perform poorly in emotion shift, and our model comprehends the mood swings in the conversa-
our model is no exception. As shown in Table 3, BERT- tion via introducing the dialogue structure information and
ERCachieveshigheraccuracyinrecognizingsampleswith- contextualinformationintothefine-tuningstep.
out emotion shift than with it in most cases. Nonetheless,
In dialogue b, Bob’s words are split into utterance (b,
westillmakesignificantprogressinthisscenariocompared
0) and utterance (b, 2), which poses obstacles to analyz-
topreviousworks,andthecomparisonresultsareshownin
ingtheemotionstateofformerutterance.Infact,the“That
Table 3. Through analysis, we believe that improving the
I haven’t been able to have a job.” in utterance (b, 2) im-
representationabilityofthemodelservesastheoptimalso-
plies thatthe emotionstate of bothutterances isfrustrated.
lutiontothisproblem.Astheproposedparadigmbuildsthe
However, the abstract utterance-level features in the previ-
entiretrainingprocessonthePLM,wemayexploitpowerful
ous paradigm make it difficult to analyze contextual infor-
PLMstosolvethisprobleminthefuture.
mation,thusleadingtothewrongpredictionofDAG-ERC.
Differently, BERT-ERC inserts the contextual information
D ComparisonExperiments
intothePLMsandmakesthecorrectpredictionforutterance
Tobetterillustratetheadvantagesoftheproposedparadigm, (b,0).Moreover,inutterance(b,3),DAG-ERCfailstodis-
we additionally conduct comparison experiments in the tinguishtheemotionstateofAliceandBobwhileourmodel
three scenarios. Specifically, regarding the offline predic- addresses this issue via introducing the dialogue structure
tion, we visualize three utterances and the corresponding informationintothePLMs.
predictionresultsofBERT-ERC(teacher)andDAG-ERCon
Concerning utterance (c, 1), which contains positive
IEMOCAPdataset.Forthelimitedresourcescenarioandthe
“yeah, yeah, yeah” and negative “I’ll have a little debt in
OERCscenario,wecomparethenumberoftrainableparam-
theend.”,DAG-ERCclassifiesitasneutral.Asamatterof
etersandinferencespeedofseveralmodels,respectively.
fact,AlicepointsouttheexcitementofBobinutterance(c,
2).Unfortunately,methodsfollowingthepreviousparadigm
D.1 Visualization
cannot extract such hints, as they do not consider contex-
To intuitively show the advantages of the proposed model tualinformationanddialoguestructureinformationuntilthe
andtheflawsofexistingmethods,weconductvisualization second stage. Differently, the proposed paradigm explores
(a) (b)
Figure2:(a)Limitedresourcesscenario.(b)OERCscenario.
Overall(%) Emotion-shift(%) Emotion-constant(%)
MSA SSA MSA SSA MSA SSA
IEMOCAP 63.22 66.16 53.30 50.35 69.26 75.35
MELD 63.43 64.11 58.13 58.52 74.56 75.38
DailyDialog 54.61 55.70 51.19 52.84 49.12 55.73
EmoryNLP 35.19 35.72 33.43 34.03 45.15 44.32
Table4:PerformancecomparisonbetweenMSAandSSAonfourdatasets.(PLM:RoBERTa-basewiththe10layersfrozen)
these two kinds of information when fine-tuning the PLMs alargeamountofcomputationalresources.
andthusfacilitatesthecomprehensionoftheinteractionbe-
tweenthespeakers. D.3 Inferencespeed
Toevaluatetheinferencespeedoftheproposedmodelinthe
D.2 TrainableParameters
OERCscenario,wecomparethepredictiontimeofdifferent
We compare the number of trainable parameters of several ERCmodelsonthetestsetofIEMOCAP(1623utterances).
ERCmodelsinFigure2(a).Methodsfollowingtheprevious AsshowninFigure2(b),EmoBERTaandBERT-ERC-large
paradigm, such as DAG-ERC, only utilize query utterance take lots of time for inference, which can be ascribed to
informationwhenfine-tuningthePLMs,thusleadingtothe theintroducedcontextswhenfine-tuningthePLMs.Toad-
difficulty in analyzing contextual information and dialogue dress this issue, we propose the two-stage training strategy
structure information. Moreover, EmoBERTa confronts the to utilize the time in the speaking stage. In such a manner,
similarproblemasitdoesnotadaptthefine-tuningprocess BERT-ERC-medium outperforms DAG-ERC in both accu-
to the ERC task. Thus, these algorithms make all parame- racy and inference speed. Besides, we further reduce the
ters(includingtheparametersinthewordembeddinglayer) PLM size to meet the speed requirement of several appli-
trainableinthetrainingprocessforbettermodellingcapabil- cations,suchasautomaticconversationalagents.Asshown
ity.Differently,theproposedBERT-ERC-large(fr8)freezes inFigure2(b),BERT-ERC-tinyachievestheperformanceof
the first 8 encoder layers and the word embedding layer. 63.27% and the cost time in inference is almost negligible
AsshowninFigure2(a),itsignificantlyoutperformsDAG- compared to other methods. Overall, with the combination
ERC and EmoBERTa with only half trainable parameters, of a large-scale PLM and a tiny-scale PLM, we meet the
which can be credited to the integration of query utterance real-time requirement in the OERC scenario at the cost of
information,contextualinformation,anddialoguestructure limitedperformanceloss.
information when fine-tuning the PLM. To meet practical
needs, we use limited-scale PLMs in the limited resource E Multi-SpeakerAggregationand
scenario. As illustrated in Figure 2(a), compared to DAG-
Single-SpeakerAggregation
ERC and EmoBERTa, BERT-ERC-base (fr 6) significantly
reducesthetrainableparameters,whereasstillachievesbet- To demonstrate the effectiveness of single-speaker aggre-
terperformance.Moreover,BERT-ERC-base(fr10)alsoob- gation in the resource-limited scenario, we conduct com-
tains comparable performance to these two methods with parison experiments on four datasets using RoBERTa-base
only a negligible number of trainable parameters. Overall, with the first 10 layers frozen as the PLM. As the results
the proposed paradigm can be well adapted to the limited in Table 4 show, single-speaker aggregation outperforms
resourcesscenarioandoutperformsthemethodsthatrequire multi-speaker aggregation in overall weighted fscore on all
datasets. Moreover, it achieves better performance in most
emotion-shift cases and emotion-constant cases. Accord-
ingly, single-speaker aggregation not only provides a boost
when conversational emotions remain stable, but also fo-
cusesthemodelonthemoodswingsofthespeaker,thereby
improving ERC performance in the emotion-shift cases.
Compared to existing methods, which use RoBERTa-large
asthePLM,ourapproach(BERT-ERC+RoBERTa-base(fr
10)+SSA)achievescomparableperformancewithonly2%
trainableparameters.