Efficient Fine-Tuning of BERT Models on the Edge
Danilo Vucetic*, Mohammadreza Tayaranian*, Maryam Ziaeefard,
James J. Clark, Brett H. Meyer and Warren J. Gross
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
McGill University
Montreal, Canada
{danilo.vucetic, mohammadreza.tayaranian}@mail.mcgill.ca,
{maryam.ziaeefard, james.clark1, brett.meyer, warren.gross}@mcgill.ca
Abstract—Resource-constrained devices are increasingly the than inference1 and more resource utilization generally. Tools
deployment targets of machine learning applications. Static like model compression are not enough to bridge the gap
models,however,donotalwayssufficefordynamicenvironments.
(i.e., a model 1/3 the size with similar performance is hard
On-devicetrainingofmodelsallowsforquickadaptabilitytonew
to achieve), and compressed models may not be training-
scenarios. With the increasing size of deep neural networks, as
noted with the likes of BERT and other natural language pro- efficient [7]. The problem specifically lies with the greater
cessing models, comes increased resource requirements, namely memoryrequirementsoftrainingcomparedtoinference,since:
memory,computation,energy,andtime.Furthermore,trainingis 1)accessestomainmemoryaretwoordersofmagnitudemore
farmoreresourceintensivethaninference.Resource-constrained
energy intensive than computation; and 2) large models can
on-device learning is thus doubly difficult, especially with large
not fit in cache, meaning that higher latency accesses to main
BERT-likemodels.Byreducingthememoryusageoffine-tuning,
pre-trained BERT models can become efficient enough to fine- memory are required [7]–[9].
tune on resource-constrained devices. We propose Freeze And Enabling on-device learning for large language models
Reconfigure(FAR),amemory-efficienttrainingregimeforBERT- necessitates two conditions: 1) using a compressed model to
like models that reduces the memory usage of activation maps
reduce baseline memory requirements, and 2) training in a
during fine-tuning by avoiding unnecessary parameter updates.
resource-efficient manner. To achieve the latter condition we
FAR reduces fine-tuning time on the DistilBERT model and
CoLA dataset by 30%, and time spent on memory operations propose Freeze And Reconfigure (FAR), a memory-efficient
by 47%. More broadly, reductions in metric performance on the fine-tuning regime for BERT-like models. We focus first and
GLUE and SQuAD datasets are around 1% on average. foremostonreducingmemoryusageduringthebackwardpass
Index Terms—Transformers, BERT, DistilBERT, NLP, Lan- by reducing the largest contributors to said usage: activations
guageModels,EfficientTransferLearning,EfficientFine-Tuning,
and gradients. We introduce a methodology that identifies
Memory Efficiency, Time Efficiency, Edge Machine Learning
which parameters to freeze and which to continue training.
Freezeherereferstodisablingparameterupdatesduringback-
propagation. We also propose a method of dynamic architec-
I. INTRODUCTION
ture reconfiguration such that frozen and non-frozen parame-
ters are grouped separately. Reconfiguration reduces poorly-
Large language models employing attention-based architec- structured memory accesses which, for example, encumber
tures have revolutionized Natural Language Processing (NLP) unstructured pruning methods. The contributions of this paper
withthelikesofBERTandGPT-3,achievingnumerousstate- are summarized as follows:
of-the-art scores on well-studied tasks [1], [2]. As language • We introduce a novel learning metric that tracks the size
models move from the cloud to resource-constrained devices of weight updates over contiguous groups of parameters
(i.e., edge devices), their deployment is made difficult by during fine-tuning using the L norm. According to the
1
constraints in available resources such as memory, computa- metric, the best-learning subsets of nodes are selected.
tion, energy, and time [3]–[5]. Solely considering inference • We introduce a novel parameter freezing scheme that ex-
for edge learning is insufficient as the operating environment ploits architectural reconfiguration, grouping frozen and
may be dynamic, and input data may change over time nonfrozen parameters, reducing training-time resource
[5]. Learning on edge devices allows models to continually consumption.
adapt to their environments and to the requirements of their
FAR achieves sizeable reductions in the resource consump-
users, without revealing data to the cloud [4]–[6]. However,
tion of fine-tuning. Our results show that when fine-tuning
training requires about three times more memory operations DistilBERT on CoLA with 60% of the model parameters
frozen, fine-tuning time is reduced by 30% and memory
*Equalcontribution. 1Duringinferenceonlytheparametersanddataareretrievedfrommemory
(2operations).Duringtraining,theparametersmustberetrievedatleasttwice
andstoredonceafterbeingupdated,activationsarestoredandretrieved,and
978-1-7281-0397-6/22/$31.00©2022IEEE dataisretrieved(6operations).
2202
yaM
3
]GL.sc[
1v14510.5022:viXra
access time is reduced by 47%, while metric performance is despite the large drop in trained parameters. While BitFit
maintained. Similar results are achieved for other GLUE and worksonuncompressed(i.e.,highlyoverparameterized)BERT
SQuAD tasks. Evidently, FAR makes training more efficient models, on the more compressed variants like DistilBERT,
while maintaining metric performance. it is expected to fail due to the smaller network size and
lower capacity. We address this issue by fine-tuning a greater
II. BACKGROUNDANDRELATEDWORK
proportion of the parameters.
A. Transformers and BERT Models: Training and Efficiency
III. FREEZEANDRECONFIGURE
Transformers and BERT-like models make use of Attention
On-device learning of large language models requires com-
andFeed-ForwardNetwork(FFN)sublayerstoextractlinguis-
pressed models and efficient training procedures. The reduc-
tic knowledge and achieve state-of-the-art scores [10]. BERT
tion in memory usage provided by these requirements has
in particular uses the Transformer Encoder architecture to
knock-on effects: higher energy efficiency, reduced computa-
modellanguagesbypre-trainingonlargedatasetsofrelatively
tion,andreducedmemoryaccesstimes.Inthecaseofmemory
simple language tasks. To deploy BERT-like models to a
access time, reducing the number of parameters decreases the
new downstream task, the model must be fine-tuned [1]. This
amount of information transferred across a system.
allowstheuseofasinglesetofweights,thepre-trainedBERT
FAR is specifically designed for use with compressed lan-
weights, as the starting point for various, faster converging,
guage models, specifically DistilBERT, whose capacity and
fine-tuning tasks, avoiding the large overhead of pre-training
adaptability are diminished from their uncompressed counter-
the full BERT model2. Various methods have been proposed
parts [17]. This is accomplished by fine-tuning a subset of
to compress BERT including DistilBERT [11], MobileBERT
linear layer weights (called FFNs in DistilBERT) as well as
[12], and TinyBERT [13]. A detailed discussion of compress-
their biases, in contradistinction to BitFit, which trains only
ing large language models is found in [14], including analysis
the biases of BERT.
ofthemajorbottleneckofTransformer-basedmodels:theFFN
In FAR, the sets of fine-tuned weights in the linear layers
sublayers,whichcontributemoreparameters,runtimememory
are selected in a structured manner to avoid sparse memory
consumption, and inference latency than all other sublayers.
accesses which would delay memory operations [18]. Each
Model compression is useful for enabling on-device learning,
node in an FFN layer is considered a single group of param-
but greater efficiency during training is desirable to further
eters. These nodes are classified as learner and nonlearner
enable the realization of large models on edge devices.
nodes depending on how well a node performs during fine-
B. Efficient Learning tuning. The parameters of the nonlearner nodes are frozen
while learner nodes are fine-tuned. Frozen nodes no longer
On-device learning has been detailed in [5], including
requiregradientcalculationsduringthebackwardpass,storage
methods of data compression and theoretical approaches to
of activations, or memory accesses during the backward pass.
efficiency. When considering on-device learning, a fundamen-
Reconfiguration of the FFN layers is completed during fine-
tal trade-off must be kept in mind to train in a reasonable
tuningbyseparatinglearnerandnonlearnernodesintodistinct,
amountoftime:eitherthetraining-timeresourcerequirements
newly created, FFN sublayers.
of a model must be decreased, or the hardware resources
Each Transformer block in DistilBERT is made up of a
must be increased. The former approach is usually studied
multi-head attention layer which feeds an FFN. The FFN
in terms of model compression such as in [11]–[13]. Others
consistsoftwodenselayerswhichcontain3072and768nodes
take the problem as reducing the real requirements of train-
respectively. The weights of the FFNs make up more than
ing without altering model architecture. One such approach,
66%oftheparametersofthewholenetwork.Thus,freezinga
[15], trains only the best-learning weights of a feed-forward
subsetoftheseweightshasaconsiderableeffectontheoverall
neural network, while keeping the others at their initialization
number of updated parameters of the model. Past work has
values. Trained weights are selected by tracking the largest
shownthatfreezingupto80%offeed-forwardneuralnetwork
accumulated weight updates over some initial training steps.
parameters results in minimal changes in accuracy for smaller
The authors also further reduce memory requirements by
models and simpler tasks [15].
regenerating frozen weights from a pseudorandom number
generator,therebytradingmemoryforextracomputation.This A. Selection of Learner Nodes
approach does not work for BERT-like models as the weights
The set of learner nodes is decided upon after an initial
ofthepre-trainedmodelarenotrandomlygenerated.Addition-
set of fine-tuning iterations during a process we call priming
ally, the unstructured selection of weights leads to inefficient
(cf. Figure 1, green nodes in left figure are learner nodes).
memory accesses, an issue which we address with structured
During priming, a copy of the pre-trained FFN weights is
selection in FAR. A similar approach, BitFit [16], freezes all
stored and the network is fine-tuned for some percentage,
BERT weights during fine-tuning and only applies updates
p, of the total number of optimization steps. The priming
to bias terms. The authors report near-baseline performance
percentage,p,iskeptsmallsoastoavoidtheadditionalburden
of fully fine-tuning a large model for a greater proportion
2Asreportedin[1],4cloudtensorprocessingunitsrunningfor4daysare
requiredtopre-trainBERT’s110millionparameters. of the optimization steps. It is expected, however, that more
TABLEI
EFFECTIVENESSOFPRIMINGANDRETENTIONWITH5AVERAGEDRUNS
ONDISTILBERTFOREACHDATASET
MNLI CoLA
r
10% 25% 40% 10% 25% 40%
p
1% 81.8 81.9 82.1 52.8 53.1 53.3
5% 81.8 82.1 81.9 51.9 52.7 53.7
10% 81.9 82.0 82.2 53.4 52.5 54.0
permutation is applied to the output vectors. The combination
of reconfiguration and permutation trades memory accesses
Fig.1. Overviewofprimingstepsandthedynamicreconfigurationofnodes
for additional time spent on computation and data movement,
inFFN.Intheleft,thelearner(green)andnonlearner(red)nodesarechosen
after the priming steps. In the right, the nodes are reconfigured to disable which is far less costly [8].
gradient computation for red weights. The output of the FFN is permuted Using nodes as parameter groupings and reconfiguring the
afterreconfiguration.
model this way allows us to avoid memory access issues that
arise in methods like unstructured pruning. Since individual
priming should result in higher metric performance. After weights are never solely accessed, we avoid sparse memory
fine-tuning the model during priming, the initial FFN weight accesses.Reconfigurationisalsobeneficialforpracticalimple-
vectors, we,i, are subtracted from the fine-tuned FFN weight mentation since in PyTorch, automatic gradient computation
n
vectors, φe,i, for each Transformer Encoder, e, FFN sublayer, can not be disabled for singular parameters, but instead only
n
i, and node, n. We employ the L norm to compute the total for whole layers or sublayers. Thus, unlike unstructured prun-
1
amountlearnedbyeachnodeintheFFN.Thisisindistinction ing, no special hardware or libraries are needed to implement
to [15], where each weight is chosen individually based on FAR.
the difference in its initial and trained value. Usage of the L
1 IV. EXPERIMENTS
normallowsfortheweightsoftheFFNnodetobegroupedso
that architectural modifications can be made later for greater We test FAR using the compressed BERT-based model
memory savings. The learning metric is computed as: DistilBERT [11]. DistilBERT is a pre-trained language model
andcanbefine-tunedtodownstreamtasks.DistilBERThassix
me,i =(cid:13) (cid:13)φe,i−we,i(cid:13) (cid:13) (1) Transformerencoderlayers,eachwithtwoFFNsublayers(i.e.,
n n n 1
e ∈ {1,··· ,6} and i ∈ {1,2} in Equation 1). We fine-tune
Finally, to compute the set of learner nodes, a retention themodelusingalearningrateof2e−5,withalinearlearning
percentage, r, is defined as the ratio of learner nodes to the rate schedule, batch size of 16, using at most 5 epochs.
total number of nodes. After sorting the learning metric for Experiments are run on NVIDIA Tesla V100 Volta GPU
each FFN, the r% of nodes with the largest metric are classi- accelerators to gather metric results for all datasets. Wher-
fied as learners; the rest as nonlearners. Note that decreasing ever timing is reported, these results have been gathered on
the node retention results in more nonlearner nodes, which the NVIDIA Jetson Xavier NX edge device. Memory access
in turn reduces memory utilization during fine-tuning. Using time is computed using the NVIDIA’s profiling tool, nvprof.
higherretentionvaluesisexpectedtohaveapositiveimpacton Memory access time is the summation of the execution time
metricperformanceasitincreasesthemodel’sabilitytoadapt formemory-relatedAPIcalls,namelycudaStreamSynchronize,
tothedown-streamtask.Inaddition,theprimingandretention cudaMemcpyAsync and cudaMemsetAsync.
hyperparameters are defined as percentages to allow them to FAR is tested against conventional and efficient fine-tuning
scale to larger datasets and varying models. For example, a approaches using standard NLP datasets from the GLUE
more compressed model may require higher node retention to benchmark and SQuAD 2.0 [19], [20]. All the GLUE tasks
avoid substantial losses in metric performance. are included in the experiments except for RTE, MRPC, STS-
B because of their small dataset sizes and WNLI because of
B. Dynamic FFN Reconfiguration
its confounding results [21]. This leaves MNLI, QQP, QNLI,
After assigning the learner and nonlearner nodes, the FFNs SST-2,andCoLA.CoLA(9594trainingexamples)andMNLI
of each Transformer block are reconfigured to separate the (433ktrainingexamples)areusedtofindeffectiveprimingand
nonlearner nodes from learner nodes. As shown in Figure 1, retention percentages in grid searches (Cf. Table I). MNLI
FFN nodes are reconfigured into two parallel sub-modules. and CoLA are believed to represent small and large datasets,
Suchreconfigurationensuresthatthememoryoflearnernodes respectively[19].Eachreportedvalueistheaverageof5fine-
is grouped together, allowing only the fine-tuned parameters tuning attempts with random seeds to ensure consistency.
to be retrieved during fine-tuning. Finally, the reconfigured Inordertotestthehypothesisthathigherprimingandhigher
FFNs need to have their output order restored such that their retention percentages produce better metric performance, we
outputs are coherent with the parameters of the model, so a complete a grid-search style test on CoLA and MNLI. The
TABLEII
METRICPERFORMANCEOFDISTILBERTWITHANDWITHOUTFARONGLUEANDSQUAD2.0-1%PRIMINGAND10%AND40%RETENTION.EACH
FARRUNISACCOMPANIEDWITHITSPERCENTAGEDROPCOMPAREDTOTHEBASELINE.THELASTCOLUMNSHOWSTHEAVERAGESCOREDROP
PERCENTAGEACROSSALLTASKS.†SHOWSOURIMPLEMENTATION.
CoLA MNLI QNLI QQP SST2 SQuAD2.0
Avg
MatthewsCorr. Acc. Acc. Acc. Acc. EM F1
Baseline† 53.6 82.1 89.1 90.2 91.1 65.0 67.9
52.8 81.9 88.2 90.0 91.1 63.3 66.4
FAR10
-1.58% -0.24% -1.01% -0.22% 0.00% -2.59% -2.27% -1.13%
53.3 82.1 88.5 90.2 91.3 63.6 66.6
FAR40
-0.55% 0.00% -0.67% 0.00% 0.22% -2.14% -2.01% -0.74%
TABLEIII
COMPARISONOFFAR10WITHRANDOMNODESELECTIONANDBITFIT
CoLA MNLI SQuAD2.0
MathewsCorr. Acc. EM F1
FAR10 52.8 81.9 63.3 66.4
Random
52.0 81.8 62.8 65.7
Selection10
BitFit 51.7 81.5 49.8 49.8
and 17% reductions compared to the baseline. For memory
Fig.2. Overalltimeandtotalmemoryaccesstimeforfine-tuningDistilBERT
onCoLAusingFARwithvariousretentionpercentagesontheNVIDIAJetson access time, 47% and 36% are the time reductions associated
XavierNX.Primingpercentageissetto1%acrossallruns.ValuesforFAR10, to FAR and FAR .
FAR40andthebaseline(FAR100)areindicatedwithgreen,redandbluedots, Final1 ly0
, we
carry40
out an ablation study to measure the
respectively.
effectivenessofourmethodagainstrelatedworksandtoshow
that FAR is in fact necessary for efficient fine-tuning. First, to
results are listed in Table I. The table shows that with higher showtheeffectofusingpriming,weperformanexperimentin
retention percentage and higher priming percentage, fine- whichthelearnerandnonlearnernodesarerandomlyselected.
tuning produces a higher metric score, with the highest score Table III shows that for the same retention value of 10%,
occurringwith10%primingand40%retention.Moreover,the FAR,whichusesprimingtoselectnodes,performsbetterthan
difference between 1% and 10% priming is small enough to random node selection, with the gap being wider in the more
warrant the use of 1% priming for FAR. This also means that complex SQuAD task. Comparing FAR with BitFit, which
the training overhead is made minimal since extra priming freezes all the weights of all dense layers across the network,
does not necessarily correlate to better performance. Hence- we see a drop in performance of less than 2% for CoLA
forth, FAR x will represent FAR using 1% priming and x% and MNLI. However, BitFit performs poorly on SQuAD 2.0,
node retention. FAR 10 and FAR 40 are used to demonstrate proving its failure to cope with complex tasks on compressed
twotrade-offpointsbetweenmetricperformanceandresource models like DistilBERT. The memory access and training
utilization. The former has lower resource utilization while times of fine-tuning on DistilBERT using BitFit on CoLA
also producing lower metric performance and vice-versa for are 237 and 384 seconds. Clearly, BitFit spends more time
the latter. The results of this comparison are listed in Table accessing memory, but around the same time fine-tuning as
II alongside with the baseline implementation of DistilBERT FAR (Figure 2).
10
using the Hugging Face python library [22], without freezing
any weights during fine-tuning. We observe higher metric
V. CONCLUSIONSANDFUTUREWORK
scores for FAR compared to FAR and a lower drop in In this paper we propose FAR, a novel method to reduce
40 10
performancecomparedtothebaselineatjust0.74%compared fine-tuning memory consumption by exploiting the overpa-
to1.13%respectively.Thelargestdropsinperformanceoccur rameterization of large language models. We show that for a
on SQuAD 2.0, which is the most complex dataset tested. compressed BERT-based model, it is not enough to simply
Figure2showstheeffectofchangingtheretentionpercent- freeze large sections of the model during fine-tuning, but
ageontrainingtimeandmemoryaccesstime.Asimilartrend that freezing must be selective and structured. Despite large
is observed in both figures, showing that using setups with decreases in the number of fine-tuned parameters, metric
lower retention values reduces both fine-tuning and memory performance remains near baseline levels, while fine-tuning
access time. These results indicate that FAR reduces the timeandmemoryusagearesignificantlyreduced.Futurework
resource consumption of fine-tuning, and as a result also involvesinvestigationsintonewdomainssuchasTransformers
reduces training time. FAR and FAR are also indicated on NLP and vision tasks. We will also apply FAR to other
10 40
with green and red dots, respectively. In terms of overall fine- backbone models such as MobileBERT to demonstrate the
tuning time, FAR and FAR each respectively show 30% generalizability of the method.
10 40
ACKNOWLEDGMENT [15] M.Golub,G.Lemieux,andM.Lis,“Fulldeepneuralnetworktraining
onAprunedweightbudget,”inProceedingsofMachineLearningand
WethankHuaweiCanadafortheirsponsorshipofthiswork Systems 2019, MLSys 2019, Stanford, CA, USA, March 31 - April 2,
and Compute Canada for providing computational resources. 2019,A.Talwalkar,V.Smith,andM.Zaharia,Eds. mlsys.org,2019.
[Online].Available:https://proceedings.mlsys.org/book/260.pdf
[16] E. B. Zaken, S. Ravfogel, and Y. Goldberg, “Bitfit: Simple
REFERENCES parameter-efficientfine-tuningfortransformer-basedmaskedlanguage-
models,” CoRR, vol. abs/2106.10199, 2021. [Online]. Available:
[1] J.Devlin,M.-W.Chang,K.Lee,andK.Toutanova,“BERT:Pre-training https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.10199[unpublished]
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in [17] S. I. Mirzadeh, M. Farajtabar, A. Li, N. Levine, A. Matsukawa, and
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter H. Ghasemzadeh, “Improved knowledge distillation via teacher assis-
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language tant,”inProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Minneapolis, vol.34,no.04,2020,pp.5191–5198.
Minnesota: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jun. 2019, pp. [18] W. Wen, C. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, and H. Li, “Learning structured
4171–4186.[Online].Available:https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423 sparsity in deep neural networks,” Advances in neural information
[2] T.Brown,B.Mann,N.Ryder,M.Subbiah,J.D.Kaplan,P.Dhariwal, processingsystems,vol.29,pp.2074–2082,2016.
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, [19] A. Wang, A. Singh, J. Michael, F. Hill, O. Levy, and S. Bowman,
A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, “Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural lan-
D.Ziegler,J.Wu,C.Winter,C.Hesse,M.Chen,E.Sigler,M.Litwin, guage understanding,” in Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop
S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP,
I.Sutskever,andD.Amodei,“Languagemodelsarefew-shotlearners,” 2018,pp.353–355.
inAdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,H.Larochelle, [20] P. Rajpurkar, R. Jia, and P. Liang, “Know what you don’t know:
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33. Unanswerablequestionsforsquad,”inProceedingsofthe56thAnnual
Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 1877–1901. [Online]. Available: Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc ShortPapers),2018,pp.784–789.
[3] E. Strubell, A. Ganesh, and A. McCallum, “Energy and policy [21] M.A.Gordon,K.Duh,andN.Andrews,“Compressingbert:Studying
considerations for deep learning in nlp,” in Proceedings of the 57th the effects of weight pruning on transfer learning,” ACL 2020, p. 143,
AnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2019, 2020.
pp. 3645–3650. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/P19-1355. [22] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V. Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi,
pdf P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf, M. Funtowicz, J. Davison, S. Shleifer,
[4] R. Sharma, S. Biookaghazadeh, B. Li, and M. Zhao, “Are existing P. von Platen, C. Ma, Y. Jernite, J. Plu, C. Xu, T. Le Scao,
knowledge transfer techniques effective for deep learning with edge S. Gugger, M. Drame, Q. Lhoest, and A. Rush, “Transformers: State-
devices?” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Edge Computing of-the-art natural language processing,” in Proceedings of the 2020
(EDGE),2018,pp.42–49. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
[5] S. Dhar, J. Guo, J. J. Liu, S. Tripathi, U. Kurup, and M. Shah, “A System Demonstrations. Online: Association for Computational
survey of on-device machine learning: An algorithms and learning Linguistics, Oct. 2020, pp. 38–45. [Online]. Available: https:
theory perspective,” ACM Trans. Internet Things, vol. 2, no. 3, Jul. //aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6
2021.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3450494
[6] M. Satyanarayanan, “The emergence of edge computing,” Computer,
vol.50,no.1,pp.30–39,2017.
[7] H. Cai, C. Gan, L. Zhu, and S. Han, “Tinytl: Reduce memory, not
parameters for efficient on-device learning,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
2020,virtual,2020.[Online].Available:https://proceedings.neurips.cc
[8] S. Han, X. Liu, H. Mao, J. Pu, A. Pedram, M. A. Horowitz, and
W.J.Dally,“Eie:Efficientinferenceengineoncompresseddeepneural
network,” in Proceedings of the 43rd International Symposium on
ComputerArchitecture,ser.ISCA’16. IEEEPress,2016,p.243–254.
[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA.2016.30
[9] J.L.HennessyandD.A.Patterson,Computerarchitecture:aquantita-
tiveapproach,5thed. Elsevier,2012,pp.B–3.
[10] A.Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N.Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
inneuralinformationprocessingsystems,2017,pp.5998–6008.
[11] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “Distilbert, a distilled
version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” 2019. [Online].
Available:http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108[unpublished]
[12] Z. Sun, H. Yu, X. Song, R. Liu, Y. Yang, and D. Zhou,
“MobileBERT: a compact task-agnostic BERT for resource-limited
devices,” in Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. Online: Association for
Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2020, pp. 2158–2170. [Online].
Available:https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.195
[13] X. Jiao, Y. Yin, L. Shang, X. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Li, F. Wang,
and Q. Liu, “TinyBERT: Distilling BERT for natural language
understanding,” in Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2020. Online: Association for Computational
Linguistics, Nov. 2020, pp. 4163–4174. [Online]. Available: https:
//aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.372
[14] P.Ganesh,Y.Chen,X.Lou,M.A.Khan,Y.Yang,D.Chen,M.Winslett,
H. Sajjad, and P. Nakov, “Compressing large-scale transformer-based
models: A case study on bert,” Transactions of the Association for
ComputationalLinguistics,vol.9,pp.1061–1080,2021.