www.nature.com/npjcompumats
ARTICLE OPEN
fl
A rule-free work ow for the automated generation of
fi
databases from scienti c literature
✉
Luke P.J.Gilligan 1,3,Matteo Cobelli 1,3,ValentinTaufour 2 and StefanoSanvito 1
Inrecenttimes,transformernetworkshaveachievedstate-of-the-artperformanceinawiderangeofnaturallanguageprocessing
tasks.Herewepresentaworkflowbased onthefine-tuningofBERTmodelsfordifferentdownstream tasks,whichresultsinthe
automatedextraction of structured information fromunstructured natural languageinscientificliterature. Contrary toexisting
methodsfortheautomatedextractionofstructuredcompound-propertyrelationsfromsimilarsources,ourworkflowdoesnotrely
onthedefinitionofintricategrammarrules.Hence,itcanbeadaptedtoanewtaskwithoutrequiringextensiveimplementation
effortsandknowledge.Wetestourdata-extractionworkflowbyautomaticallygeneratingadatabaseforCurietemperaturesand
onefor bandgaps. Theseare thencompared with manuallycurated datasets and withthoseobtained with astate-of-the-art
rule-basedmethod.Furthermore,inordertoshowcasethepracticalutilityoftheautomaticallyextracteddatainamaterial-design
workflow,weemploythemtoconstructmachine-learningmodelstopredictCurietemperaturesandbandgaps.Ingeneral,wefind
that,althoughmorenoisy,automaticallyextracteddatasetscangrowfastinvolumeandthatsuchvolumepartiallycompensates
fortheinaccuracy in downstream tasks.
npjComputational Materials (2023)9:222; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-023-01171-9
INTRODUCTION they are often proprietary in nature, despite the efforts of some
Sincethedawnofmodernscience,therehasbeenacontinuous, open-access initiatives14,17. Thus, the existing landscape of
exponential growth in the volume of published scientific experimental datasets is incomplete and fragmented, and most
literature1.Whenrelatedtomaterialsscience,suchanabundance oftheknownexperimentalresultsremainaccessibleonlythrough
of data clearly offers a wide range of possibilities and unstructured scientificliterature.
opportunities. Materials data, in fact, can provide the foundation This is a serious drawback for materials innovation, not only
for models and theories to navigate the physical/chemical space because experimental data corresponds to reality but also
and ultimately drive discovery. Unfortunately, access to informa- because experimental data may often contain information
tionfromunstructuredliteratureatsuchamassivescalepresents inaccessible to simulations or may be located where simulations
significant technical and practical challenges. As a result, in are prohibitive or highly inaccurate. It is also important to note
general, curated databases are scarce and often limited to that typical ML models for property predictions are often very
theoretical data only. This is because for theory data, one does data-hungry, so the absence of large datasets of experimental
not need to exploit the literature, but simply run highly data precludes their formulation. Still, there have been a few
standardized first-principles calculations, which are amenable to successful examples of the use of experimental data only to
automatedcollection2–5.Importantly,large-scaletheoreticaldata- constructMLpredictorsandclassifiersformaterialsproperties18–20
setshavebeenproventobearevolutionarytoolinthesearchfor and examples of transfer-learning between theoretical and
new materials with unique properties and for the discovery of experimentaldata21.Thesesuggestthatthecreationofstructured
intricate materials trends. For instance, they have been used to experimental databases may represent a significant asset in
predict the existence of novel magnets6, to identify materials materials design.
regions favorable to superconductivity7, to design novel high- Given the large volume of literature regularly published, this
entropyalloys8,toidentifylow-thermal-conductivitycompounds9, appearstobeadauntingtask.Inordertounderstandthescaleof
or to predict the zT thermoelectric figure of merit in inorganic the problem, consider that there are 231 journals listed in the
materials10, just to name a few examples. Furthermore, theory ‘materials science and engineering’ category of the Clarivate
datasetshavebeenaplatformforconstructing machinelearning Master Journal List (mjl.clarivate.com/home). If the average
(ML)models with enhancedthroughput11–13. number of articles published yearly in a journal is ~1000, we will
Although no calculation can replace an experiment, databases haveaboutaquarterofamillionarticleswithmaterialinformation
containing experimental results are much rarer and typically published per year. Clearly, experimental databases of such
smaller. In general, these are extremely labor-intensive to capacity cannot be curated with laborious manual methods,
generate, since the information is not directly collated at the indicating that automatization is the only way possible. The
laboratoriesbutneedstobeminedfromthepublishedliterature. current state-of-the-art method for automatizing the data-
Asaconsequence,experimentaldatabasesarenotcomprehensive extraction process from literature is ChemDataExtractor22. Chem-
but usually list only a handful of properties for each compound, DataExtractor relies upon rules-based text parsing coupled with
suchasthecrystal14–16ormagneticstructure17.Furthermore,they conditional random fields for named entity recognition (NER)23.
update slowly and, given the effort needed to construct them, Hence,theperformanceofanewmodeldependsontheabilityof
1SchoolofPhysics,AMBERandCRANNInstitute,TrinityCollege,Dublin2,Dublin,Ireland.2DepartmentofPhysicsandAstronomy,UniversityofCalifornia,Davis,CA95616,USA.
3Theseauthorscontributedequally:LukeP.J.Gilligan,MatteoCobelli.✉
email:sanvitos@tcd.ie
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences
;,:)(0987654321
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
2
the user to adequately define rules. Furthermore, since different thatforsuchlargegenerativelanguagemodels,thereislittletono
quantities can be described by natural language in structurally ecosystem of domain-specific pre-training, a feature of the BERT
different ways, every new extraction task requires the user to architectures. Indeed, non-domain-specific generative models
definenewgrammaticalandsyntacticrules.Thesefeaturesmake have not been shown to be superior to domain-specific BERTs
the process still labor-intensive and reduce the large-scale in the field of material science. Finally, generative models are
deploymentof such methods. known to “hallucinate", meaning that they currently have a
In recent years, significant progress has been made in tendency to make up false information in the generated text.
constructing tools that improve our ability to automate further Whenprocessinglargeamountsofdata,itisimpossibletoverify
thisextractionprocedure.Textualrepresentationsthataresuitable thatagenerativemodelhasnotmanufacturedsomeofthedatain
for advanced, context-aware, natural language processing (NLP) theresultingdatabase.Thisisaparticularlycriticalprobleminthe
have long been a focus of research in this domain. Simple context of the automatic generation of databases, since each
representations such as one-hot encoding of dictionaries of entry is required to be reliably linked to its source. Common
vocabulary, bag of words models, or statistical representations strategies to limit the effects of hallucinations include iteratively
weighting the importance of certain terms over others, such as prompting to double-check the output. However, these
termfrequency-inversedocumentfrequency(TF-IDF)24,havebeen approaches rapidly increase the number of tokens passed as
thego-torepresentationsformanyofthemoreconventionalNLP prompt, hence the computation time and/or the API access cost
tasks.Forinstance,theyhavebeensuccessfullyusedinsentiment for each extraction. For these reasons, we believe that an
analysis or simple classification tasks. These representations are information-extraction workflow based on domain-specific BERT
still adequate for handling large-scale texts with simple models. can be useful for the community, since it can be deployed and
However, in order to operate on a level at which the extracted fine-tuned oncommonly available hardware.
individual terms or sentences are processed accurately, we must In this work, we introduce a rule-free workflow for the
turnto moresophisticated methods of representation. automatic extraction of information from scientific literature. The
Word embedding naturally follows as a viable candidate for extraction is performed by mean of a sequence of BERT models
such applications. These are textual representations that aim to finelytunedonspecificdownstreamtasks.Thesuperiorcontextual
describe words in a vocabulary as vectors in a high-dimensional awareness of the BERT representation allows the necessary
vector space. In this space, the similarity between words is grammatical and syntactic rules for extraction to be learnt by
captured by the projection of one such vector onto the other. the transformer model from a sample of labeled text. Thus, the
There are numerous algorithms to learn embeddings from a text labeling step now substitutes the design of a rule-based
corpus of documents. Examples of the most widely used grammar and it does not require any previous knowledge of
algorithms are word2vec25 and GloVe26, models that have also naturallanguageprocessingorcodingtodevelopnewextraction
been used for scientific text embedding. For instance, the procedures. This is enabled by our self-contained literature-to-
word2vecalgorithmwasusedbytheMaterialsGenomeInitiative structured-properties database pipeline, which is here named
to train a domain-specific materials science embedded represen- BERT Precise Scientific Information Extractor (BERT-PSIE). More-
tation27. This embedding was demonstrated to exhibit a good over, by leveraging the transfer-learning capabilities of BERT
knowledge of the chemical space, and insights into the physical models, the convergence in performance on the downstream
propertiesofmaterialscouldevenbeextractedfrompurelytext- tasksisreachedwitharelativelysmalltrainingsetoflabeledtext.
based representations trained on scientificliterature alone. EachentryofthedatabasegeneratedbyBERT-PSIEcanbelinked
Transformer networks elaborate on these ideas and are the toa specific source without any possibility of hallucination, since
currentstateoftheartintherepresentationofnaturallanguage28. all the language models used are trained for classification tasks
The core concept of a transformer network is the use of self- and not used in a generative setting. Note that the work
attention to capture the syntactic interdependencies between presented here is capable of extracting data only from text, but
words, meaning that these networks exhibit a superior ability to not from tables or images. An expansion of our capabilities to
parsethecontextinwhichatermappearsinasentence.Arguably, forms of information dissemination different from text is highly
one of the most prevalent transformer-based models for NLP is desirableand will besubject of future work.
the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers Value has been already demonstrated for databases automati-
(BERT), a large-scale architecture with several hundred million cally generated with previously developed schemes, providing
tuneable parameters29. Since its conception in 2018, BERT has usefulinsightsintoarangeofphysicalandchemicalpropertiesof
rapidly become the language platform for models in many NLP compounds36–38. More recently, there have also been several
applications, achieving state-of-the-art performance across a inroads made in the development of transformers for materials
rangeofbenchmarks30,31.Furthermore,therehavebeenanumber science applications39,40. However, all these attempts present a
of BERT architectures adapted to outperform the conventional commonshortcoming.Namely,whenvalidatingthequalityofthe
BERT model in various disparate NLP domains, including but not dataset automatically generated by NLP methods, one does not
limited to the fields of general scientific literature32, financial have available a reference set of manually curated entries to
sentimentanalysis33,andbiomedicaltext-mining34.Thereisalsoa compare with. This means that the automatically generated
previously fine-tuned architecture for the field of materials datasets cannot be tested against an established ground truth
science, called MatSciBERT35, which is one of the pre-trained reference.Thisissueisaddressedherebychoosingtheproperties
architectures wehave employedinthis work. for which we can obtain a manually curated dataset. The first of
Currently, much focus is being placed on the use of thesepropertiesistheCurietemperature,T ,forwhichweavailof
C
autoregressive large language models, as a means of achieving the combined manually curated databases from Nelson et al.18
state-of-the-artperformanceinalargevarietyofnaturallanguage and Byland et al.41, and of one automatically generated using
tasks. While these models are giving promising results, there are ChemDataExtractor42. The second such property is the electronic
somesignificantdrawbacksassociatedwiththeiruse.Firstly,their band gap, for which has a manually curated dataset aggregated
sizeimposesheavyhardwarerequirementsatinferencetimeand by Zhuo et al.20. We will show that with a modest amount of
even larger requirements for fine-tuning. It is possible to use labeleddata,itispossibletotrainmodelsthathaveperformance
servicesprovidedbyprivatecompanies,such asOpenAI,tohave onparwiththestate-of-the-artrule-basedmethods.Furthermore,
access to these models through API. However, the fees can we demonstrate that the automatically generated data can be
become prohibitive for the large number of prompts needed by usedtoconstructbothT andbandgappredictors,suchthatthey
C
an information-extraction workflow. It is also worth considering canalready be used forpredicting materialproperties.
npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences
;,:)(0987654321
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
3
°
°
°
°
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of the BERT-PSIE pipeline for the automated extraction of compound-property pairs from the scientific
literature.TheworkflowreliesonthecombinationofBERTmodelsfine-tunedfordifferentdownstreamtaskssuchassentenceclassification,
namedentityrecognition,andrelationclassification.HereweusetheCurietemperatureasanexample.Seetextformoredetails.
Webelievethattheextensiveandrigoroussetofbenchmarks, the downloaded corpus, and a Named Entity Recognition (NER)
introduced in this work should be taken as a standard in the module extracts material-property relations from sentences
proposal of novel extraction models. This will enable a thorough containing single unambiguous relations. Note that sentences
comparisonhighlightingstrengthsandweaknesses,acomparison containing a single entity only, either the compound or the
that appears increasingly necessary as the deployment of property,arediscarded.Then,asecondmoduleperformsrelation
large language models in materials science becomes more classification for sentences where multiple mentions of com-
widespread43,44. pounds and/or material’s properties are present. The material-
propertyrelations extracted thenform thedatabase.
Results are now presented for the entire workflow. In each of
RESULTS thefollowingsections,wewillfirstconsiderthedatabaseofCurie
BERT-PSIE Structure temperatures extracted with BERT-PSIE and then the database of
In this section, we discuss the performance of the NLP workflow electronic band gaps. Firstly, we discuss the performance
implemented in BERT-PSIE for the automated extraction of (precision, recall, and F 1 score) achieved by the three main
structured data from scientific literature. BERT-PSIE is based on modules.Then,wecomparetheautomaticallyextracteddatabase
theconcatenationofdifferentBERTmodels,fine-tunedtoperform with our manually curated ones18,41,20 and those created with
the specific tasks necessary for the text-mining pipeline. Our ChemDataExtractor42.Finally,wewillevaluatetheperformanceof
designed workflow can be adapted to the extraction of any this database in the screening for magnetic compounds by
binary-related information and can potentially be extended to training MLmodels to predictthe propertyinquestion.
morecomplexformrelations.Inthiswork,wefocusonminingthe
T of ferromagnets and the electronic band gap of semiconduc- BERTmodels fine-tuning
C
tors/insulators because of the availability of manually curated LetusdiscusstheCurietemperaturedatabasefirst.Theevaluation
databases, which can be used as ground truth in assessing metricsforthesentence-levelrelevancyclassifierarepresentedin
performance. theupperrowofTable1.Precision,P,andrecall,R,arebothabove
Itiscertainlytruethattheextractionofinter-relatedproperties 0.8, indicating high-level model performance on the test data.
(for instance, a materials property may depend on the experi- Care was taken to ensure that the training data was as
mentaltemperature)canbemorecomplex,butthesearedifficult representative as possible of the literature. However, similarities
tobenchmarkbecauseofthelackofmanuallycurateddatasets.In in the syntactic structure reporting a temperature value are
such case, the extraction should provide the compound and all unavoidable, a fact that increases the level of noise in the
the inter-related quantities, simultaneously. The fact that extracted data. For example, consider the sentence ‘Barium
BERT-PSIE works at the sentence-level may pose a limit to this, titanate (BaTiO ) is a ferroelectric with a Curie temperature of
3
since the different information may be contained in different 120∘C’. In this case, ‘Curie temperature’ refers to a paraelectric-
sentences. Strategies to overcome such limitations certainly ferroelectric transition and not to ferromagnetism, but the
deservefuture work. syntactic structure is almost identical to what was found when
The structure of our entire workflow can be appreciated by describingthemagneticT .Suchambiguitycanalsobefoundin
C
lookingattheschemeinFig.1.Papersaredownloadedfromthe constructions such as ‘The melting temperature of a compound
webbyusingakeyword-basedsearchwiththeCrossrefRESTAPI marks the solid-liquid phase transition. This critical temperature
(api.crossref.org).Aclassifieridentifiestherelevantsentencesfrom for Fe is 1538∘C’. Since the classification is performed at the
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
4
Table1. PerformanceofthethreemodulesdevelopedfortheCurie Table2. Performanceofthethreemodulesdevelopedfortheband
temperatureextraction:thesentence-levelrelevancyclassifier,the gapextraction:thesentence-levelrelevancyclassifier,theNER,andthe
NER,andtherelationclassifier. relationclassifier.
Model Entity P R F Support TrS TeS Model Entity P R F Support TrS TeS
1 1
Classifier 0.83 0.80 0.81 3941 801 Classifier 0.95 1.00 0.97 404 134
NER Chem 0.92 0.86 0.89 754 1769 168 NER Chem 0.80 0.96 0.87 1166 4000 1000
T 0.97 0.81 0.88 42 BandGap 0.78 0.97 0.87 119
C
Relation 0.72 0.64 0.68 200 50 Relation 0.88 0.88 0.88 300 80
Resultsarepresentedforthetestsets.Herewereport:precision,P,recall,R, Resultsarepresentedforthetestsets.Herewereport:precision,P,recall,R,
andF score.Thesizeofthetest(TeS)andtraining(TrS)setsarealsogiven andF scores.Thesizeofthetest(TeS)andtraining(TrS)setsarealsogiven
1 1
(numberofsentencesused).ForthecaseofNER,wereportresultsforboth (numberofsentencesused).ForthecaseofNER,wereportresultsforboth
chemicalentities(Chem)andT ,aswellasthesupport. chemicalentities(Chem)andT ,aswellasthesupport.
C C
sentence level, the content of ‘This critical temperature for Fe is
1538∘C’ is evaluated independently from that of the preceding
system (NER-BERT). Sentences containing a single mention of a
sentence. Then, it is expected to be erroneously classified. These
Curie temperature and a single compound are directly added to
limitations are inherent to working at the sentence level, and
thedatabase.Whenthesentencescontainmultiplereferencesof
further effort is needed in order to resolve the issue effectively.
compounds and/or Curie temperatures, then a list of sentences
Here,wemitigatethedrawbackbyselectivelyanalyzingscientific
with all the possible pairs of entity mentions is built. These are
texts taken fromthemagnetism subjectarea. thenclassifiedwiththerelationshipclassificationBERTmodel.The
The second row of Table 1 presents the results for the named
compound/property pair predicted by the modelto be correct is
entity-recognitionstepofourautomatedextractionpipeline.The
thenaddedto thedatabase.
precision, recall, and F score of both the classified entities,
1 Thedataextractedissubsequentlypost-processedbyscalingall
compound and Curie temperature, are all consistently very high, the temperatures to units of Kelvin and by filtering out
indicatinganexcellentperformanceoftheBERTmodelfortoken
compositions that could not be expressed as a combination of
classification. This allows us to extract mentions of compounds
chemical elements (i.e., commercial or colloquial names for
and Curie temperatures from the sentences identified using the compounds).Allchemicalformulasarescaledtohavenormalized
sentence-level relevancy classifier. Furthermore, given the integercoefficients(e.g.,Ga Fe O becomesGaFe O ).Thefinal
0.5 2.5 4 5 8
context-aware nature of BERT-based language models, similar extraction has given us a database containing 3518 distinct
entitiescan bediscriminatedagainst, basedon thesyntactic and compound-property entries together with their digital object
grammatical context in which they appear. In practice, our BERT identifiers(DOI).
modelcan,forthemostpart,differentiatebetweentemperatures The same workflow is then executed for the case of the
generally and those specifically mentioning critical temperatures. electronicbandgapextractiontask,andtheperformancemetrics
It should be noted, however, that this context-awareness suffers ofeachofthestepsinourpipelinearesummarizedinTable2.The
the same weakness as mentioned above in being limited in its performance of the sentence-level classifier, first row, is indeed
ability to differentiate between different types of critical excellentonthetestset,withaperfectrecallandaslightlylower
temperaturesrelatingtophasetransitions.Regardless,itperforms precisionat0.95.Thesemetricsareevenhigherthanthosefound
excellently for the purpose of recognizing both compounds and fortheCurietemperatureandindicateanalmostperfectabilityto
Curietemperatures. differentiate between sentences that contain or do not contain
Relationship extraction has proved to be the most challenging information about the band gap of a compound. It is assumed
task in our pipeline due to the sheer quantity of potential that the superior performance of this classifier, even with fewer
combinations of words in various syntactic structures. This also training examples, is due to the reduction in ambiguity in
constitutes the major challenge when defining rule-based reporting band gaps, when compared to the likely similarities in
grammar constructions for methods such as ChemDataExtractor. syntactic structures that result from the reporting of critical
ThelastrowofTable1summarizesthekeyevaluationmetricsfor temperatures. Similarly, the NER step consistently remains very
the BERT relationship-extraction model. Although this is the performant,withahighprecision,recall,andF score.Finally,we
1
module presenting the lowest scores, the model still exhibits findthattherelationship-extractionstepforthecaseoftheband
reasonably good performance and, therefore, it is useful to gapoutperformssignificantlythatoftheCurietemperature.Thisis
associate the correct compound-property pairs, thus improving believed,onceagain,toberelatedtothemoreconsistentwayin
thequalityofthefinaldatabase.Intheremainderofthissection, which band gaps tend to be reported within the scientific
different alternative schemes for associating compounds and literature, with the sentence structures generally more formulaic
properties are compared with this relations classifier system. thaninthecaseofCurietemperaturementions.Thishypothesisis
Furthermore, we will discuss the effect of considering Curie further highlighted by the improved performance of extraction
temperaturevaluestakenfromphraseswithmultiplecompound- methods relying on the rule associating compounds with band
propertymentionsontheintegrityofthefinalextracteddatabase. gaps based on the order in which they appear in the sentence.
Giventhegoodperformanceofthethreemodules,apipelineis This enhancement in performance can be seen in Table 5 and is
constructed to automate the extraction of property values from discussed further inSectionIIE.
unstructured literature. Approximately 180,000 full-text XML In this case, ~77,000 papers have been downloaded for the
papers have been downloaded and split into lists of sentences. bandgapextractionandsplitintolistsofsentences.Runningthe
These sentences are subsequently run through the sentence- sentence-level classifier yields a dataset of ~126,000 sentences
relevancy classifier, yielding a total of ~55,000 sentences deemed likely to contain a band gap. The post-processing steps
considered relevant. Here, a sentence will be relevant, if it is are performed as previously described, scaling all units toeV in
likely to contain a Curie temperature mention. The resulting this case, yielding a final database of 2090 unique compound-
sentence list is passed through the named entity recognition propertyrelationships.
npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
5
in the data extracted, as any potential contextual ambiguity in
Table3. PerformanceoftheextractioncarriedbyBERT-PSIEandthe
reportingagivenvalueisfarmorelikelytodeteracontext-based
rule-basedChemDataExtractorperformedonthesamecorpus.
system than a rules-based one. This fact results in a general
decrease in the BERT-PSIE recall, when compared to the rules-
T Bandgap
C
based and hybrid pipeline. One can then argue that recall is
Model P R F P R F generally a less important metric for the fidelity or usefulness of
1 1
ChemDataExtractor 0.67 0.49 0.56 0.68 0.55 0.61 the resulting database. This point is further investigated by
introducingadditionalmetricsmeasuringthereal-usecaseofthe
SingleMentions 0.82 0.20 0.32 0.78 0.23 0.35
extracted data. Their goal is to evaluate the usefulness of the
BERT-PSIE 0.67 0.31 0.42 0.70 0.40 0.51
resulting automatically generated database. This discussion is
BERT-PSIE+ChemDataExtractor 0.64 0.64 0.64 0.63 0.72 0.67 reportedinsections II EandII F.
The final evaluation for both targets, is performed over the
Thecomparisonisexecutedon200annotatedabstractsforeachoneof
thetasks,namelytheT andband-gapextraction.Theprecision,recall,and combination of the values extracted with BERT-PSIE and
C
F score are presented for BERT-PSIE (single mentions only and the full ChemDataExtractor (last row of Table 3). This returns a sharp
1
pipeline),ChemDataExtractor,andthecombinationofthetwomethods. increaseintherecallwhencomparedwitheitherofthemethods.
Themanuallyannotateddatasetshaveasupportof45entriesforT Cand The implication of this result is that the rules-based pipeline and
109entriesforthebandgap. the BERT-based pipeline have different strengths in extracting
quantities.Infact,thedistinctincreaseinrecallimpliesthatthere
is quite a little overlap in the quantities extracted by the two
Comparison withrule-based methods
methods.Then,thereductioninprecisionrelativetotheindividual
We now compare the performance of our BERT-PSIE workflow
BERT-PSIE and ChemDataExtractor is a consequence of both the
withthestateoftheartofrule-basedmethods.Thetesthasbeen
true-positive entries in common to the two methods are not
designed following the approach introduced in references42,45
doublycounted,butanyincorrectlyextractedvaluesareaddedto
andconducedover200manuallyannotatedabstractsforboththe
thetotaldatabase.Thisleadstoanincreaseinthefalsepositives
compound-Curie temperature and compound-band gap extrac-
relative to the true ones, and hence a reduction of the total
tion (200 each). The abstracts are taken from the arXiv dataset46
precision.
byrunningakeywordsearchonasampleofunusedentriesinthe
database.Thismeansthatthecontentofthetestcorpushasnot
Extractionperformance anddatabase structure
been already included in any other sets used to construct
BERT-PSIE. For the T the keyword used for the search is ‘Curie’, For this section, our discussion begins with the case of the Curie
C
butweexcludeabstractscontainingtheterm‘Weiss’.Incontrast, temperature extraction. Evaluating the metrics (precision, recall,
the band-gap corpus is constructed using a keyword search for and F 1 score) of a data-extraction method provides only limited
abstracts containing any of the terms ‘band gap’, ‘band-gap’, or information on its performance in that it gives only general
‘bandgap’,alongsidetheterm‘eV’.Randomabstractsaresampled indications of the quality. Clearly, the ultimate test is set by its
fromtheresultingcorpustoyieldadatasetof200forbothcases. successintheextractiontaskithasbeendesignedfor,namelyby
This selection has the aim to increase the number of positive the quality of the data extracted and by their potential use in
extraction targets(support). downstreamtasks(e.g.,theconstructionofMLmodels).Perform-
BothBERT-PSIEandChemDataExtractorarerunonthistestset. ing such an assessment is generally challenging since one lacks
A record in the extracted database will be deemed true-positive manually curated data that are difficult to assemble because of
only if all entities in the target compound-property pair are theelevatedtimeinvestmentinvolved.Inourcase,thesituationis
present and matched to the manual annotation. The number of much more favorable, since we can compare our automatically
truepositives,falsepositives,andfalsenegativesfortheextraction extracted data with manually curated databases from various
tasksaremanuallycountedforeachpropertyextraction,allowing sources. In the case of the Curie temperatures, we avail of the
for the calculation of the precision, recall, and F score for each database of Nelson et al.18. This dataset has been created by
1
model. The ChemDataExtractor model for the extraction of Curie aggregating the AtomWork database47, Springer Materials48, the
temperaturecamefromthesamerule-basedpipelinereportedin Handbook of Magnetic Materials49 and the book Magnetism and
ref.42.Ithasnotbeenpossibletoincludethesnowballmodelof Magnetic Materials.50. Nelson’s database is then combined with
thisextractionpipelinetomakeitfullyhybrid,asthemodelused T values from a dataset manually aggregated by Byland et al.41,
C
in the work is not readily available. In the case of the band-gap whichismainlyfocusedon,althoughnotlimitedto,Co-containing
extraction with ChemDataExtractor, however, the full hybrid compounds.Thus,thiscombineddatabaseisconsideredtobeour
extraction is performed using the model from ref. 45. The results ground truth, which amounts to 3,638 unique ferromagnetic
ofthis comparison arepresented inTable3. compounds andtheir associated Curietemperatures.
From the table, it is clear that the precision of both models is Ourresultsarealsocomparedwithaseconddatabase,namely
very consistent across both quantities, with the full BERT-PSIE the one obtained by combining the rules-based ChemDataEx-
pipeline slightly outperforming the hybrid ChemDataExtractor tractor scheme with a semi-supervised snowball algorithm42. At
model in the case of the band-gap extraction. In order to isolate this point, it is important to remark that the two automatic-
theimpactoftherelationship-extractionmoduleandtoestimate extracted databases are based on a rather similar corpus of
the amount of noise that this introduces, we also consider the papers, namely those obtained with a keyword search from
case where we only extract data from sentences containing a Crossref. This search includes relatively recent articles and
single compound-property relationship. This means excluding information is extracted only from the text. In contrast, the
sentences where multiple T ’s are associated with a list of database of Nelson et al. is largely based on data reported in
C
compounds,sentencesthatarepronetointrinsicambiguity,since, tablesandincludesmuchhistoricalinformation(resultspublished
in natural language there are many different semantic ways to as early as the fifties). Despite the similarity in their respective
relate two lists of quantities. We denominate this case as ‘single corpora, however, the BERT-PSIE and ChemDataExtractor data-
mentions’, for which we observe a significant increase in the bases,ofseveralthousanddatapointseach,presentaremarkably
extraction precision. However, this gain in precision is compen- smalloverlapofonly694compounds.Ofsimilarsizeistheoverlap
satedforbyaseverereductionintherecall,therebyreducingthe betweentheautomatedandmanualdatasetsof687compounds
overallF score.TheBERT-PSIEpipelineresultsaremoreselective forBERT-PSIEvsmanuallycuratedand595forChemDataExtractor
1
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
6
Fig.2 Comparisonbetweenthecontentofthedifferentdatabases:(redbox)BERT-PSIE,(bluebox)ChemDataExtractor,and(greenbox)
themanuallyextracteddatabaseofref.18.aNormalizeddistributionoftheCurietemperaturesextracted.Apeakisvisibleinthedistribution
of~300Kinboththeautonomouslyextracteddatabases,whichisnotseeninthemanuallyextractedone.bRelativeelementalabundance
acrossthecompoundspresentinadatabase.Althoughthereisgeneralagreementamongthethreedatabases,additionalpeaksareobserved
forvariouselementsinthecaseofautomaticallyextracteddata,whicharenotpresentinthemanuallycurateddataset.Themostsevereof
thesediscrepanciesisintherelativeabundanceofMn-andO-containingcompounds.Notethattheautomaticallyextracteddatasetsandthe
manuallycuratedonesarebasedondifferentliteraturelibraries.
vs manually curated. Overall the three datasets (BERT-PSIE, isabiasinthemostrecentliteraturetowardscriticaltemperatures
ChemDataExtractor, and the manually curated one) share only closeto300K,orerrorsinthemodelaggregateT valuescloseto
C
262 compounds. All comparisons performed in this section are ambient temperature. In support of the second hypothesis, it is
made by taking the median Curie temperature value for worthrecallingthatmentionsofroomtemperaturefeatureheavily
compounds that containmultiple entries for each dataset. in sentences containing the target information, even if the room
Beforegoingintothedetailsofthecomparison,weobservethat temperature is not the target temperature. An example of this
asignificantsourceoferrorisassociatedwithelementalcompounds situation is the sentence: ‘The magnetization curve at 300K was
(e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, Gd, etc.), where the error is the variance of the obtainedandtheCurietemperaturewasdeterminedbyTGAunder
extracted T compared with our ground truth. This is due to the a magnetic field, yielding a Curie temperature of 1043K for Fe.’
C
generaldifficultyoftheNERindifferentiatingbetweenanelemental Despitethesedifferences,thestillgoodsimilaritybetweentheCurie
compoundandanelementusedasadopantinanotherwisenon- temperature distributions indicates that the relative abundance of
magnetic material (e.g., bulk Mn vs Mn-doped GaAs). As dopants high- and low-temperature ferromagnetic materials has been
canappearinamultitudeofconcentrationsandinalargevarietyof adequately captured by our automated extraction technique
hosts, erroneous assignments may result in a large spread in the withouttheneedforcomplexgrammar-ruledefinitions.
distribution of the temperatures collated. With this exception, the Further understanding can be achieved by looking at the
distributions of Curie temperatures across the different databases relative elemental abundance across the unique compounds
areinverygoodagreementwitheachother,asonecanseeinthe present in a given database (the frequency at which a particular
toppanelofFig.2.Theagreementisparticularlyclosebetweenour elementappearsinthedatabase).Thisisshowninthelowerpanel
automatically extracted dataset and the one constructed with of Fig. 2, again for all three datasets. As expected, the largest
ChemDataExtractor, but both present a peak in the distribution at abundancesarefoundforthemagnetictransitionmetals,someof
aroundroomtemperature,whichisabsentinthemanuallycurated therareearths,andoxygen,afeaturesharedbyalldatabasesand
one.Therearetwopossiblereasonsbehindthisfeature:eitherthere corresponding to the actual elemental distribution among
npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
7
Fig.3 ComparisonbetweentheT distributionsofcompoundscontainingthemostcommonelementsfoundinferromagnets.Theviolin
C
plotsdisplaytheT distributionofthecompoundscontainingspecificelementsinthedatasetautomaticallygeneratedwithBERT-PSIE(red)
C
andChemDataExtractor(blue),andinthemanuallycuratedgroundtruth(green).Onlythemostcommonelementsappearinginthedatasets
aredisplayedhere.Thedotsshowthemedianofeachdistribution.
Fig.4 Thedistributionofband-gapvaluesforthefivemostcommonchemicalformulasfoundinthedatabaseofband-gapsgenerated
byBERT-PSIE.Thehistogramsreporttherelativeabundance,whiledashedlinesindicategapenergiescorrespondingtospecificexperimental
measurementsor theoreticalcalculations.
magnets. More interestingly, it appears that the automatically historicalchangeinresearchfocus betweenthesources usedfor
compileddatabasesoverestimatethepresenceofMnandOand thegroundtruthcomparedwiththesourcesfortheautomatically
thatofdi-andtri-valentalkalimetals(Ca,Ba,Sr,andLa).Suchan extracted cases.
overestimate with respect to the manually extracted dataset is A similar study, with similar results, is performed on the
significantly more pronounced for the ChemDataExtractor data distributionoftheextractedbandgaps,whichcanbefoundinthe
thanfortheonesobtainedwithourworkflow.Itislikelythatsuch
SupplementaryInformation(SI)(seeSupplementaryFig.3).Asfor
a difference in distributions is mainly attributable to the data the case of the Curie temperatures, we find strong similarities
primary sources, which are different in the case of manually and
between our database and the one obtained from ChemDataEx-
automatically curated datasets. In particular, the most recent
tractor, but both present some level of disagreement with the
literature used in our extraction and in that performed by
manually curated one. We now discuss the origin of such
ChemDataExtractor, contains many entries related to Ca-, Ba-,
disagreementbylookingattheextractedband-gapdistributions,
Sr- andLa-containing perovskites (e.g.,manganites).
Theinfluenceoftheprimarydatasourceonthefinaldatasetis see Fig. 4, of the five most common chemical formulas in the
further confirmed by comparing the T distributions of com- database,namelyZnO,TiO 2,C,MoS 2,andSi.Themostinteresting
C feature is that while there is a spread of band-gap values for all
pounds containing the 25 most common elements, which is
presented in Fig. 3. Generally, there is excellent agreement five compounds, these are not uniformly distributed. In contrast,
between the distributions of the two automatically extracted thebandgapdensitiesseemtohaveaclearpeakstructure,with
datasets, which contain entries extracted from similar sources. multiple high-frequency values appearing. This can be attributed
Then, BERT-PSIE generally captures a similar distribution to the to different means of obtaining the band gap of a material
manually extracted values, although thereare evident discrepan- (experimentaloptical,experimentaltransport,theory,etc.),andto
cies for certain elements. This may be an indication of the differentpolytypes, structures, ordopant-varied compounds.
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
8
same(1.67eV57,PBE-GGA).Carbon,incontrast,deservesattention
onitsownsincealargevarietyofpolymorphsispossible.Infact,
thedistributionshowsaclearpeakforsemimetalgraphene58and
one for the bulk diamond structure (5.47eV59). Then, there is a
uniformly distributed region, which is characterized by band gap
values associated with carbon buckminsterfullerenes, C60. This
extendsoverthe1.5–2.7eVrange,andhasaclearpeakattheDFT
valueof1.09eV(PBE-GGA)60.
Databasequality fordownstream tasks: Curie temperature
The quality of a material-property database can be quantified in
terms of its usefulness for material design. Once again, we start
thediscussionfromtheCurietemperatures,byfirstassessingthat
the returned value to a query related to a compound present in
thedatabaseisreliable.Toachievethisgoal,wehavedesigneda
‘query test’ comparing the Curie temperatures automatically
extracted with the one present in our reference manually
extracted dataset. In order to make the comparison between
our database and the ChemDataExtractor-generated one not
dependent on the particular class of compounds extracted, we
only compare entries that are shared by all the datasets (262
compounds). The query test results for BERT-PSIE are reported in
Fig.5,whiletheperformancemetricsforthedifferentdatasetsare
summarized ontheleft-hand sideof Table4.
As mentioned before, the most challenging step in our
extraction workflow is the relation-classification step. In order to
evaluatetheperformanceofourmodelforrelationclassification,a
variety of additional extraction strategies have been attempted
andcomparedagainstthegroundtruthdataset.Thefirstofthese
strategies involves, as before, taking only the ‘single-mention’
resultsextractedfromsentencescontainingonlyasinglemention
ofacompoundandasinglementionofaCurietemperaturevalue.
Inthiscase,weassumethatthetwoentitymentionsarerelatedto
each other, thus removing the need for any relation-assignment
step(‘SingleMention’inTable4).Thesecond strategyimposesa
rule that associates compound/value pairs based on the order in
whichtheyappearedinthetext(‘OrderofAppearance’inTable4).
Finally,wehavetakeneverypossiblecombinationofcompound/
value pairs in order to compare our results with random
Fig. 5 Query-test for the BERT-PSIE-generated T dataset. associations (‘All Combinations’ in Table 4). This choice corre-
aComparisonbetweentheT
queriedinthedatasetauC
tomatically
spondstoarelation-classifiermodelthatalwaysoutputsapositive
generated by BERT-PSIE andC the values contained in the manually classification. Table 4 is complemented by results obtained with
curated dataset. The comparison is performed over the 262 our constructed BERT classifier (‘BERT-PSIE’), with the data
compounds that are shared by all datasets examined in this work. extracted by ChemDataExtractor and by aggregating these last
The median value is returned whenever multiple T C values are twodatasets (‘ChemDataExtractor +BERT-PSIE’).
collected for a given compound. b The same comparison is
AscanbeseenfromTable4,allofthedatasetscompiledwith
performed on the dataset resulting by combining the one
our rule-free pipeline have metrics comparable to those of
generated by BERT-PSIE and the one generated by
ChemDataExtractor. ChemDataExtractor, and the one constructed with BERT-PSIE
appears to be the best-performing on almost all the query-test
Goingintomoredetail,considerfirstthecaseofZnOinFig.4a. metrics. In particular, BERT-PSIE returns the best R2 coefficient of
In the distribution, we find three clearly visible peaks, which are 0.81 and root mean squared error (RMSE) of 126K. Interestingly,
easilyassociatedwiththeexperimentalbulkbandgap(3.37eV51), BERT-PSIE gives us a mean absolute error (MAE) slightly larger
than that obtained with ChemDataExtractor. This suggests that
the density-functional-theory (DFT) calculated one for bulk ZnO
(0.73eV51forPBE-GGA)andtheDFT-calculatedoneformonolayer BERT-PSIE achieves an accuracy on-par with ChemDataExtractor
ZnO(1.69eV52againPBE-GGA).Asimilarsituationisencountered (thetwoproducedatasetsequallysimilartothemanuallycurated
for Si in Fig. 4e, where the two main peaks are attributed to the one), but it is slightly less prone to display large outliers. Note,
experimentalbulkindirectgap(1.1eV53)andtheonereturnedby however, that the notion of an outlier and its relevance to the
DFT simulations (0.61eV2, PBE-GGA). A different situation is then overall performance of a method need to be taken with some
encountered for TiO 2 in Fig. 4b, where the two main dominant caution in this query test. In fact, if the T C of a compound is
peaksbothcorrespondtoexperimentalgaps,buttheyarefortwo erroneously extracted (the ML model extracts the wrong
differentpolymorphs,namelyanatase(3.2eV)andrutile(3.0eV)54. temperature), there is no particular advantage of having the
Finally, MoS 2 and C in Fig. 4d, c display more complexity. In the wrong T C close to the real one. This point can be better
firstcase,wefindthreedominantpeaks.Infact,togetherwiththe understood by looking at the parity plot in Fig. 5, where entries
experimentalbulkindirectbandgapof1.29eV55,manymentions are either on the parity line (exact extraction) or away from it
in the literature concern the experimental band gap of the without any particular correlation with the actual T value
C
monolayer form of MoS (1.8eV56) and the DFT estimate of the (erroneous extraction).
2
npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
9
Table4. PerformancecomparisonbetweenthedifferentautomaticallygeneratedT datasetsagainstthemanuallycuratedonefromrefs.18,41.
C
#Entries Query RFpredictions
R2 MAE(K) RMSE(K) R2 MAE(K) RMSE(K)
ChemDataExtractor 4289 0.78 48 137 0.65 123 176
Thiswork
Singlementions 1858 0.77 51 139 0.66 128 174
Orderofappearance 2682 0.77 51 141 0.65 126 176
Allcombinations 4308 0.81 52 127 0.61 134 184
BERT-PSIE 3518 0.81 50 126 0.65 126 174
BERT-PSIE+ChemDataExtractor 7052 0.86 38 109 0.69 118 165
The left-hand side of the table refers to the query test, while the right-hand side refers to the RF T predictor. Together with the BERT-PSIE and
C
ChemDataExtractordatabases,wealsoconsiderdifferentBERT-assembleddatasetsobtainedbyusingdifferentrelation-classificationstrategies(seedetailsin
thetext).Thequerybenchmarkisdoneoverthe262compoundsthataresharedbyallthedatasets,whiletheRFpredictionsaredoneover2623compounds
thatarenotpresentinanyoftheautomaticallycollateddatasets.Valuesforthebest-performingdatasetsareinbold.Additionally,thelastlineofthistable
showstheperformanceonthesetestsforthecombineddatabasesgeneratedbyBERT-PSIEandChemDataExtractor,leadingtothebestresults.
In any case, the fact that BERT-PSIE performs better than any thatfoundforthequerytest.Mostinterestingly,wefindthatthe
other BERT-based models using different relation-classifier strate- inclusion of entries extracted in conjunction with the relations-
gies demonstrates that the inclusion of a context-aware mean of classification step in the database does not improve the
extractingcompound-valuepairsfromliteratureisadvantageous. performance of the predictor. In fact, using single mentions only
Unfortunately, this is not a massive improvement, since the returnsusthebetterR2valueof0.66andanRMSEof174K,while
metrics are rather close to those obtained by considering BERT-PSIEgivesusaslightlydegradedR2at0.65andanidentical
randomized combinations of all possible compound-value pairs RMSE, although it slightly improves the MAE (by ~2K). This is
(‘All Combinations’). Indeed, more sophisticated methods to possibly due to the fact that the inclusion of the entries from
establish the correct compound-property associations will help multiple mentions inherently adds noise to the database. Thus,
inproducinga better-automated dataset. despitethefactthatthemodelcanbetrainedoveramuchlarger
Our second test probes the ability of a given data-extraction dataset, no significantimprovement isdetected.
strategy to create datasets of sufficient quality to enable the The parity plot of our best RF model trained on the full BERT-
construction of predictive ML models. In practice, we want to PSIE dataset is presented in Fig. 6. In general, the T trends are
C
establish whether the data extracted can be the platform for captured,butitisalsoclearthatthemodelissignificantlyinferior
modelsthatpredicttheT ofunseencompounds.Inparticular,we to that presented in ref. 18, which reports a MAE of 57K. This is
C
target compositional models, namely ML algorithms using roughly a factor of two smaller than the 126K obtained for a
information directly accessible from the chemical composition of random forest model trained on the data extracted with BERT-
a given compound as features. For the case of the Curie PSIE.Althoughthiscanbepartiallyattributedtonoiseinthedata,
temperature associated with theferromagnetic transition, infact, for instance, to the likely presence in the BERT-PSIE dataset of
it has been shown that compositional models can achieve good critical temperature associated with antiferromagnets, one also
performanceiftrainedonmanuallycurateddata18(notethatthe has to consider that the data used in ref. 18 were highly curated
modelmentioneddoesnotdescribeothermagneticphases,e.g., even after the collection. For example, additional data on
antiferromagnetic structures). In order to test the ability of a paramagnets was included to improve the low-temperature part
datasettofunctionasareliabledataplatformforMLmodels,we of the distribution, while data corresponding to different
train on each automatically generated dataset a random forest concentrations of metallic alloys was selectively excluded to
(RF)modelthattakesasinputcompositionalfeatures,asdonein betterbalancethechemicaldistribution.Allthesepost-processing
refs. 18,61. We have chosen the same input features for all the RF steps were not performed here, since our task is simply that of
models trained, since, in all the cases considered, we have not assessing the quality of the automatically compiled dataset. In
observedanyimprovementwhenaddingmorefeatures.Wethen fact, one expects that automatically constructed datasets can
compare the predictions on a set of compounds that are not reachsizeslargeenoughforsuchpost-processingstepstonotbe
presentinthetrainingsetwiththevaluesextractedmanuallyfrom necessary.
the literature. For this test, we consider predictions over 2623 GiventhefactthattheoverlapbetweenourBERT-PSIEdataset
compoundsforwhichwehaveamanuallyextractedT thatdoes andtheonegeneratedbyChemDataExtractorconsistsofonly694
C
not appear in any of the datasets automatically extracted. With compounds, we have constructed an additional dataset resulting
thischoice,bothourtestsareperformedonthesamecompounds from the combination of the two. This combined database
for all the datasets considered. For compounds with multiple contains 7052 distinct entries and performs best on all the
valuesofextractedT ,themedianvalueofthecollatedresultsis metricsevaluatedineachtest(seethelastlineofTable4andthe
C
taken as the associated Curie temperature, according to the bottomplotsinFigs.5and6).Theimprovementinperformanceis
procedure introduced in ref. 18. We have also tested other likely due to the much larger size of the dataset (approximately
summary statistics, such as the mean and the mode, without double the original two) and the corresponding reduction of the
finding any significantdifference intheresults. noise present in the median values. When tested against RF
AgaintheresultsofourtestarereportedinTable4(right-hand models,themuchlargernumberofcompoundsallowsforabetter
side), where one can clearly see that BERT-based extraction sampling of the chemical space, resulting in more accurate
workflows perform rather similarly to the established rule-based predictions. As it stands, this combined dataset represents the
method. In particular, the full workflow, BERT-PSIE, has an R2 best database available for ferromagnetic T , automatically
C
identicaltothatobtainedbyChemDataExtract,withabetterRMSE extractedfromscientificliteratureaccordingtothetestdesigned
butworseMAE,weobserveforthissecondtestaresultsimilarto here.
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
10
Fig.7 EvaluationoftheRFmodelsconstructedonautomatically
extracted datasets as classifiers. a Violin plots showing the T
C
distributionsofthecompoundsscreenedusinganRFmodeltrained
on the BERT-PSIE data and compared with the manually extracted
values. The dashed line is the parity line highlighting how the
median of the screened distribution increases as the screening
threshold increases. Despite a low recall, the precision is high
enoughtoselectcompoundslikelytohaveaT higherthanagiven
C
threshold.Thescreeningisdoneoncompoundsnotpresentinthe
trainingsetoftheRF.bThesametestisperformedbytraininganRF
modelonthecombinationoftheBERT-PSIEandChemDataExtractor
datasets.
Fig.6 Performanceofarandom-forestmodelforT trainedover
C
automatically extracted databases. Parity plot (predicted T vs
C
manually extracted T ) for the best RF compositional model
C technological relevance. We used the RF model trained on the
constructed a on the BERT-PSIE dataset and b on the combined
automatically generated dataset to predict if magnets have a
BERT-PSIE and ChemDataExtractor dataset. The test set consists of
the 2623 compounds that are not present in any of the critical temperature exceeding 300K, 600K, and 900K, respec-
automatically generated datasets considered in this work but for tively. The test set for this predictor is constructed from
whichwehaveaT Cmanuallyextractedfromthescientificliterature. compounds that are present in our manually curated dataset,
butnotintheonegeneratedbyNLP.Theresultsofthisscreening,
The implication of this is that the quality of automatically comparedwiththedistributionofthetrueT ofthesecompounds
C
extracted databases improves markedly with an increase in the canbeseeninFig.7.TheshadedblueareaofFig.7representsthe
numberof disparate sources used in theextraction. There is also distribution of values predicted to have a T greater than the
C
an argument to be made that a combination of rules-based and dashedline,representingthescreeningtemperatures(300K,600K,
rule-free methods may be the best-performing strategy for
and900K,respectively).Whiletherecallofthisscreeningisquite
automatedextraction, asseenin Table3.
low,thehighprecisionbiasestheinitialdistributionintosetswith
A similar study was conducted with respect to the extractions
higher and higher T , thus demonstrating the usefulness of the
performed by ChemDataExtractor over the same sentences C
extracted database in screening for compounds with T above a
deemed relevant by the BERT-PSIE sentence classifier module. C
desired threshold. The low recall means that certain compounds
The results can be found in the Supplementary Discussion and
withT abovethedesiredtemperaturewillnotbepredictedtobe
reinforce thesimilarity inperformance of thetwo approaches. C
To conclude, as a final evaluation of the usefulness of the in the set of compounds above the temperature, however, the
compounds predicted to be in this set can be trusted with high
extracteddatabase,wetesttheabilityoftheRFmodeltrainedon
the BERT-PSIE dataset to screen unseen compounds with respect accuracy to have a T C above the desired threshold. Training a
toacertainT threshold.Thistestattemptstosimulateacommon modelusingthecombineddatasetsfromBERT-PSIEandChemDa-
C
usecaseforsuchMLmodels.Notethattypicalmagnetsemployed taExtractor results in a higher screening recall (see Fig. 7). This
aspartof some room-temperaturetechnology(e.g.,datastorage, provides an example of how the utility of these automated
electricalmotors)needtohaveaT above600K,sothatclassifying databases can be improved both by expanding the corpus size
C
magnets according to such a threshold is of significant usedforextractionandbyintroducingnewextractiontechniques.
npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
11
Table5. Performancecomparisonbetweenthedifferentautomaticallygeneratedbandgapsdatasetsagainstthemanuallycuratedonefromref.20.
#Entries Query RFpredictions
R2 MAE(eV) RMSE(eV) R2 MAE(eV) RMSE(eV)
ChemDataExtractor 2185 0.54 0.78 1.34 0.59 0.62 0.87
Thiswork
Singlementions 1,246 0.65 0.67 1.17 0.61 0.62 0.85
Orderofappearance 1819 0.67 0.64 1.13 0.62 0.63 0.84
Allcombinations 2581 0.63 0.71 1.21 0.60 0.63 0.86
BERT-PSIE 2021 0.64 0.67 1.19 0.61 0.62 0.85
Theleft-handsideofthetablereferstothequerytest,whiletheright-handsidereferstotheRFbandgappredictor.Togetherwiththedatabasesconstructed
usingBERT-PSIEandChemDataExtractor,wealsoconsiderdifferentBERT-assembleddatasetsobtainedbyusingdifferentrelation-classificationstrategies(see
detailsinthetext).Thequerybenchmarkisdoneoverthe231compoundsthataresharedbyallthedatasets,whiletheRFpredictionsaredoneover2046
compoundsthatarenotpresentinanyoftheautomaticallycollateddatasets.Valuesforthebest-performingdatasetsareinbold.
Database quality fordownstream tasks: band gap use cases, demonstrating the ability to generate a database of
TofurthervalidatetheperformanceofBERT-PSIE,asimilarstudyis ferromagnetic Curie temperatures and electronic band gaps
performed, now with the target being an aggregated dataset of comparable to the one generated using ChemDataExtractor, the
compounds and their associated band gap. For the manually state-of-the-art rule-based method for data mining from the
curated test set in this instance, a database of band gaps from scientific literature. This work opens the door for rapid and easy
reference20isutilizedandcomparedwithourresultsandwiththe access to experimental-property databases for materials infor-
resultsofthehybridChemDataExtractormodelfromDongetal.45, matics applications.
when run on the same literary corpus. The original dataset from Crucially, we have carefully benchmarked the constructed
thispaperisnotusedasadirectcomparisonbetweenthemodels, databases against manually curated reference ones through
since the workflow implemented in ref. 45 also separately extensive query tests, which is a step particular to this work.
processes tables, which are not considered by BERT-PSIE. The These have allowed us to critically assess the benefit of certain
resultsofthecomparisonbetweenthetwomethodsonthesame design choices in our workflow, such as the relation-extraction
corpuscanbeseeninTable5.Inthiscase,theBERT-PSIEpipeline step. Most importantly, we have been able to understand where
outperforms or equals the hybrid ChemDataExtractor method by improvements can be made and whether these are general or
every metric while extracting a very similar number of unique specificto thephysicalproperty extracted.
compound-band gap relationships. Interestingly, for sentences Finally, we have tested whether our automatically extracted
containing multiple mentions, the best strategy to sort out databases of compounds and their properties can be used as a
relationsseemstobetheorderofappearance,whichoutperforms platform for constructing machine-learning models, namely
all other methods. This is in contrast with the degradation in whether the database quality is sufficiently high for integration
performancereportedforthecaseofCurietemperature, Table4, in a material-discovery workflow. We have found that the mean
pointingtoanintrinsicdifferenceinthewaythesetwoquantities absolute error of chemical-informed random-forest models,
are reported in natural language. It then appears that reporting constructed over the automatically extracted database, is always
the band gap is far more procedural than reporting the Curie largerthanthatachievedwithmanuallycuratedones,roughlyby
temperature, thus the use of a more sophisticated method of a factor two. Our best results have been obtained for a Curie
establishing the correct associations between compounds and temperature database combining data from rule-free (BERT-PSIE)
properties introduces a source of noise. This result is clearly andrule-based(ChemDataExtractor)methods,owingtothelarger
property-dependent,butitisalsofairtonotethatthedifferencein datavolumeandenhanceddiversity.Notably,nomanualcuration
performance is onlymarginal. wasperformedontheautomaticallyextracteddatasets,afactthat
Finally, the parity plot for the query test and that for an RF mayberesponsibleforthedifferencesinperformance.Incontrast,
modelforband-gappredictionsareshownintheSupplementary we have shown that our BERT-PSIE dataset is sufficient to
Figure.Theresultsofthequerytestaresimilartothosefoundfor construct machine-learning classifiers able to identify high-T C
the Curie temperature, although it seems that a more diffuse magnets with high accuracy. This fact, together with the
distributionofbandgapsisnowobserved.Thisisassociatedwith possibilitytoexpandthedatasetwiththeminimumeffortoffered
the ambiguity in the various band-gap definitions noted before byarule-freestrategy,suggeststhatnatural-language-processing
(e.g.,thecaseofC),theambiguitythatislessrelevantfortheT . information retrieval can become an important asset in any
C
TheRFmodel,instead,appearstohaveaslightlyinferiorR2than material-discovery pipeline.
thatconstructedfortheT ,butbenchmarkssimilarlywithmodels
C
that can be constructed on manually curated data. In fact, we
METHODS
obtain an MAE of 0.62eV, against the value reported on
MatBench62 of 0.33eV, for the best-performing model trained Humanandnumerical effort
onthesame dataset. AlltheBERTmodelsusedinthisworkhavebeenfine-tunedona
single Nvidia A100 GPU accessed with Google Colab, with each
modelrequiring<30minutesforfine-tuning.Inparticular,weuse
DISCUSSION anearlystoppingstrategybasedonthevalidation-setloss(more
Wehaveproposedaworkflowtoautomaticallyextractstructured details are provided in Section I of the SI. As it stands, the time
datafromunstructuredscientificliterature.Thishasminimalneed bottleneckinadaptingtheworkflowtoanewtaskremainsrelated
for an extensive implementation effort and little or no require- tothemanuallabelingofthetextnecessaryforfine-tuning.Allin
ment for familiarity with complex grammar-rule definitions and all, this takes ~1 week. We now describe in more detail the
naturallanguageprocessing.Wehavethenshownsomepossible algorithmsandthetrainingstrategyusedforthevariousmodels.
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
12
Literatureextraction not uncommon in scientific literature, where one can find
TheCrossrefRESTAPIisusedtoexecuteakeywordsearchoverall sentences like ‘the Curie temperature of Fe and Co are 1043K
literature published by Elsevier. This yields metadata filtered to and 1394K, respectively’. Although easy to resolve for a human
ensure that the full-text version of the paper is available for the reader,semanticambiguitybecomesaproblemforNLP.Here,we
purposeoftextdatamining.Themetadataincludesbothabstracts treat the problem as a relation classification task. In practice,
anddownloadlinkstothefull-textpapers.InthecaseoftheCurie following the approach of Soares et al.65, we fine-tune a BERT
temperatureextraction,thestrategyusedtobuildthetrainingset architecture to classify whether a pair of entities in a sentence is
required for the fine-tuning of the different BERT models starts relatedby the“hasa T C of”relation.
from the collection and the manual labeling of 800 abstracts The dataset needed for the fine-tuning is generated by
containing the term ‘Curie temperature’ from this initial search. sampling 100 sentences from among those predicted to contain
WeruntheNaturalLanguageToolkit63(NLTK)sentencetokenizer multiplementionsbytheNER-BERTmodel.Foreachsentence,all
on these abstracts and label the tokenized sentences, which the possible pairs of compound-T C mentions are considered one
reference a Curie temperature, as relevant and the ones that do byone,andentitymarkersareaddedatthebeginningandatthe
notasirrelevant(step1inFig.1).Thisstepyieldedadatabaseof end of each entity mention. For example, from a sentence
~5000 sentences of which 189 are labeled relevant. The labeled containingtwochemicalcompoundsandtwoCurietemperatures,
datasetisusedtofine-tuneaBERTclassifiermodeltofindrelevant wegeneratefoursentencesinwhichadifferentpairofentitiesis
sentences(i.e.,sentenceslikelytocontainamentionoftheCurie surroundedbyentitymarkers.Weusethemarkers[E1 start],[E1 end]
temperature). The classifier extracts relevant sentences from the to identify the compound mentions considered and [E2 start] and
corpus of the papers. We then manually labeled 200 relevant [E2 end]toidentifytheCurietemperaturemention.Thus,bytaking
sentencesextractedfromthecorpusofthepaperswhoseabstract as an example the sentence, ‘The Curie temperature of
was used in the previous step. These extracted sentences are Ga 0.5Fe 2.5O 4 and Ga 0.7Fe 2.3O 4 have been found to be equal to
413∘C and 347∘C, respectively’ (see Fig. 1), we construct the
manually labeled as described in step 3 of Fig. 1 and are then
following four associations: (1) Ga Fe O and 413∘C, (2)
combined with the labeled abstracts. This combined corpus is 0.5 2.5 4
utilized to fine-tune a BERT model for Named Entity Recognition Ga 0.5Fe 2.5O 4 and 347∘C, (3) Ga 0.7Fe 2.3O 4 and 413∘C, (4)
Ga Fe O , and 347∘C. Then, the sentences with the marked
(NER-BERT). 0.7 2.3 4
pairs generated are manually labeled for a binary classification
In the case of the electronic band gap, a slightly different
task,wherewewilldeemasentencepositive,iftherelation“hasa
strategyisdevelopedforaggregatingthenecessarytrainingdata.
ThearXivmetadataisdownloadedfromtheKaggledataset46and T C of” is present between the two marked entity mentions and
negativeifsucharelationisnotpresent.Theresultingtrainingset,
aninitialcorpusof1000abstractsforannotationisconstructedby
searching the text of the corpus of abstracts for the terms ‘band after being balanced with respect to the mentions in each class,
gap’,‘bandgap’,or ‘band-gap’.Contained in these 1000 abstracts consistsof200sentences,eachonecontainingadifferentpairof
marked entities. This collection of BERT models trained for
were 171 sentences that contained band-gap values and thus
different downstream tasks creates a rule-free pipeline for the
wereconsideredrelevant.Asampleof501sentencesthatcontain
automaticextraction of datafromtext.
nomentionofbandgap,andthusareconsideredirrelevant,was
addedtotherelevantones.Thisenablesthecreationofadataset
fortheclassifierof672sentences,whichwassplitintoatraining,
validation, andtest setof 404,134,and 134 entries,respectively.
DATAAVAILABILITY
Thecorpususedfortheautomaticextractionprocedureofthe
Thetestabstractsforthedirectcomparisonwithrule-basedmethodstogetherwith
Curietemperature(bandgap)isobtainedbyexecutingakeyword
searchusingtheCrossrefAPIforinstancesoftheterm‘magnetic’ thedatasetsautomaticallyextractedinthemainandtestextractionsareavailableat:
https://github.com/StefanoSanvitoGroup/BERT-PSIE-TC.
(‘electronic’). This yields a database of ~180,000 (77,000) full-text
URLsofpaperslikelytocontainamentionofaCurietemperature
(bandgap)value.Thepapersarethenautomaticallydownloaded CODEAVAILABILITY
and parsed into a list of sentences. A corpus of relevant PDF
All the BERT-PSIE code necessary to run the automatic extraction of Curie
documentsisalsoconvertedintoplaintextusingPDFminer64and
temperatures and band gaps is available at https://github.com/
is similarly parsed into sentences, which are concatenated to the StefanoSanvitoGroup/BERT-PSIE-TC.
samelist.Alistofcandidatesentenceslikelytocontainthedesired
material property information is then extracted using the BERT Received:8 February2023; Accepted: 21November 2023;
classifier from these corpora, yielding a total of around Published online: 13December 2023
55,000 sentences that are deemed relevant for the Curie
temperature and around 126,000forthe electronic bandgap.
REFERENCES
Relationextraction 1. Bornmann, L., Haunschild, R. & Mutz, R. Growth rates of modern science: a
Thefinalstepofourworkflowfortheautomaticextractionofdata latentpiecewisegrowthcurveapproachtomodelpublicationnumbersfrom
consistsoftheidentificationofmentionsofchemicalcompounds establishedandnewliteraturedatabases.Humanit.Soc.Sci.Commun.8,224
(2021).
andtheassociatedproperty(Curietemperatureorbandgap)inall 2. Curtarolo,S.etal.Aflowlib.org:adistributedmaterialspropertiesrepositoryfrom
the sentences classified to be likely to contain such information. high-throughputabinitiocalculations.Comput.Mater.Sci.58,227–235(2012).
This task is performed by the NER-BERT model (step 3 of Fig. 1), 3. Talirz,L.etal.Materialscloud,aplatformforopencomputationalscience.Sci.
which is described here for the Curie temperature (the same Data7,299(2020).
appliestothebandgap).ForthesentencespredictedbytheNER- 4. Jain,A.etal.Commentary:thematerialsproject:amaterialsgenomeapproachto
BERTmodeltohaveasinglementionofchemicalcompoundand acceleratingmaterialsinnovation.APLMater.1,011002(2013).
5. Kirklin, S.etal.Theopenquantum materials database (OQMD): assessing the
a single mention of Curie temperature, we assume that the two
accuracyofDFTformationenergies.npjComput.Mater.1,15010(2015).
quantitiesarerelated,andweaddthemtothedatabase(step5in
6. Sanvito,S.etal.Accelerateddiscoveryofnewmagnetsintheheusleralloyfamily.
Fig. 1). If a sentence contains multiple mentions of chemical
Sci.Adv.3,e1602241(2017).
compounds and/or several Curie temperatures, the compound- 7. Isayev,O.etal.Materialscartography:Representingandminingmaterialsspace
temperatureassociationwillbecomeambiguous.Thisambiguityis usingstructuralandelectronicfingerprints.Chem.Mater.27,735–743(2015).
npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
13
8. Lederer,Y.,Toher,C.,Vecchio,K.S.&Curtarolo,S.Thesearchforhighentropy 34. Lee,J.etal.BioBERT:apre-trainedbiomedicallanguagerepresentationmodelfor
alloys:ahigh-throughputab-initioapproach.ActaMater.159,364–383(2018). biomedicaltextmining.Bioinformatics36,1234–1240(2019).
9. Carrete,J.,Li,W.,Mingo,N.,Wang,S.&Curtarolo,S.Findingunprecedentedly 35. Gupta,T.,Zaki,M.&Krishnan,N.M.A.,Mausam.Matscibert:amaterialsdomain
low-thermal-conductivity half-Heusler semiconductors via high-throughput languagemodelfortextminingandinformationextraction.npjComput.Mater.8,
materialsmodeling.Phys.Rev.X4,011019(2014). 102(2022).
10. Xi,L.etal.Discoveryofhigh-performancethermoelectricchalcogenidesthrough 36. Kim, E. et al. Materials synthesis insights from scientific literature via text
reliablehigh-throughputmaterialscreening.J.Am.Chem.Soc.140,10785–10793 extractionandmachinelearning.Chem.Mater.29,9436–9444(2017).
(2018). 37. Kim, E. et al. Machine-learned and codified synthesis parameters of oxide
11. Ghiringhelli,L.M.,Vybiral,J.,Levchenko,S.V.,Draxl,C.&Scheffler,M.Bigdataof materials.Sci.Data4,170127(2017).
materials science: critical role of the descriptor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 105503 38. Nandy,A.,Duan,C.&Kulik,H.J.Usingmachinelearninganddataminingto
(2015). leverage community knowledge for the engineering of stable metal–organic
12. Isayev,O.etal.Universalfragmentdescriptorsforpredictingpropertiesofinor- frameworks.J.Am.Chem.Soc.143,17535–17547(2021).
ganiccrystals.Nat.Commun.8,15679(2017). 39. Huang, S. & Cole, J. M. BatteryBERT: a pretrained language modelfor battery
13. Ali, A. et al. Machine learning accelerated recovery of the cubic structure in databaseenhancement.J.Chem.Inf.Model.62,6365–6377(2022).
mixed-cationperovskitethinfilms.Chem.Mater.32,2998–3006(2020). 40. Shetty,P.etal.Ageneral-purposematerialpropertydataextractionpipelinefrom
14. Vaitkus, A., Merkys, A. & Gražulis, S. Validation of the crystallography open largepolymercorporausingnaturallanguageprocessing.arXivhttps://arxiv.org/
databaseusingthecrystallographicinformationframework.J.Appl.Crystallogr. abs/2209.13136(2022).
54,661–672(2021). 41. Byland,J.K.etal.StatisticsonmagneticpropertiesofCocompounds:adatabase-
15. Zagorac,D.,Müller,H.,Ruehl,S.,Zagorac,J.&Rehme,S.Recentdevelopmentsin driven method for discovering Co-based ferromagnets. Phys. Rev. Mater. 6,
the inorganiccrystalstructureDatabase:theoretical crystalstructuredataand 063803(2022).
relatedfeatures.J.Appl.Crystallogr.52,918–925(2019). 42. Court,C.J.&Cole,J.M.Auto-generatedmaterialsdatabaseofCurieandNéel
16. Groom,C.R.,Bruno,I.J.,Lightfoot,M.P.&Ward,S.C.Thecambridgestructural temperatures via semi-supervised relationship extraction. Sci. Data 5, 180111
database.ActaCrystallogr.B:Struct.Sci.Cryst.Eng.Mater.72,171–179(2016). (2018).
17. Gallego,S.V.etal.MAGNDATA:towardsadatabaseofmagneticstructures.I.The 43. Dunn,A.etal.Structuredinformationextractionfromcomplexscientifictextwith
commensuratecase.J.Appl.Crystallogr.49,1750–1776(2016). fine-tunedlargelanguagemodels.arXivhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2212.05238(2022).
18. Nelson,J.&Sanvito,S.Predictingthecurietemperatureofferromagnetsusing 44. Walker, N. et al. Extracting structured seed-mediated gold nanorod growth
machinelearning.Phys.Rev.Mater.3,104405(2019). procedures from literature with GPT-3. arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13846
19. Zhang,J.etal.Machinelearningpredictionofsuperconductingcriticaltemperature (2023)
throughthestructuraldescriptor.J.Phys.Chem.C.126,8922–8927(2022). 45. Dong,Q.&Cole,J.M.Auto-generateddatabaseofsemiconductorbandgaps
20. Zhuo,Y.,MansouriTehrani,A.&Brgoch,J.Predictingthebandgapsofinorganic usingChemDataExtractor.Sci.Data9,193(2022).
solidsbymachinelearning.J.Phys.Chem.Lett.9,1668–1673(2018). 46. arXivDataset.https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/Cornell-University/arxiv(2013).
21. Chen, C., Zuo, Y., Ye, W., Li, X. & Ong, S. Learning properties of ordered and 47. Xu,Y.,Yamazaki,M.&Villars,P.Inorganicmaterialsdatabaseforexploringthe
disorderedmaterialsfrommulti-fidelitydata.Nat.Comput.Sci.1,46–53(2021). natureofmaterial.Jpn.J.Appl.Phys.50,11RH02(2011).
22. Swain,M.C.&Cole,J.M.ChemDataExtractor:atoolkitforautomatedextraction 48. Connolly,T.F.Bibliographyofmagneticmaterialsandtabulationofmagnetic
of chemical information from the scientific literature. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 56, transitiontemperatures(SpringerScience&BusinessMedia,NewYork,US,2012).
1894–1904(2016). 49. Buschow, K. & Wohlfarth, E. (eds.) Handbook of magnetic materials. Volumes
23. Lafferty,J.D.,McCallum,A.&Pereira,F.C.N.Conditionalrandomfields:Prob- 4–16and18(Elsevier,Amsterdam,Netherlands,1988–2009).
abilisticmodelsforsegmentingandlabelingsequencedata.InProceedingsofthe 50. Coey,J.MagnetismandMagneticMaterials(CambridgeUniversityPress,Cam-
Eighteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’01, 282–289 bridge,2010).
(MorganKaufmannPublishersInc.,SanFrancisco,CA,USA,2001). 51. Si,X.etal.First-principlesinvestigationontheoptoelectronicperformanceofMg
24. SparckJones,K.Astatisticalinterpretationoftermspecificityanditsapplication dopedandMg-Alco-dopedZnO.Mater.Des.93,128–132(2016).
inretrieval.J.Doc.28,11–21(1972). 52. Chen,L.,Wang,A.,Xiong,Z.,Shi,S.&Gao,Y.Effectofholedopingandstrain
25. Mikolov,T.,Chen,K.,Corrado,G.&Dean,J.Efficientestimationofwordrepre- modulationsonelectronicstructureandmagneticpropertiesinZnOmonolayer.
sentationsinvectorspace.arXivhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781(2013) Appl.Surf.Sci.467-468,22–29(2019).
26. Pennington,J.,Socher,R.&Manning,C.GloVe:Globalvectorsforwordrepre- 53. Bludau,W.,Onton,A.&Heinke,W.Temperaturedependenceofthebandgapof
sentation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in silicon.J.Appl.Phys.45,1846–1848(2003).
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 1532–1543 (Association for Computa- 54. Nosaka,Y.&Nosaka,A.Y.Reconsiderationofintrinsicbandalignmentswithin
tionalLinguistics,Doha,Qatar,2014). anataseandrutileTiO.J.Phys.Chem.Lett.7,431–434(2016).
2
27. Tshitoyan,V.etal.Unsupervised wordembeddingscapturelatentknowledge 55. Böker, T. et al. Band structure of MoS, MoSe, and α-MoTe angle-resolved
2 2 2
frommaterialsscienceliterature.Nature571,95–98(2019). photoelectronspectroscopyandabinitiocalculations.Phys.Rev.B64,235305
28. Vaswani,A.etal.Attentionisallyouneed.arXivhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 (2001).
(2017) 56. Radisavljevic,B.,Radenovic,A.,Brivio,J.,Giacometti,V.&Kis,A.Single-layerMoS2
29. Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-training of deep transistors.Nat.Nanotechnol.6,147–150(2011).
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of the 57. Tang,Q.&Jiang,D.Stabilizationandband-gaptuningofthe1T-MoS monolayer
2
2019 Conference of the North American Chapterof the Association for Com- bycovalentfunctionalization.Chem.Mater.27,3743–3748(2015).
putationalLinguistics:HumanLanguageTechnologies,Volume1(LongandShort 58. Novoselov,K.S.etal.Electricfieldeffectinatomicallythincarbonfilms.Science
Papers), 4171–4186 (Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, 306,666–669(2004).
Minnesota,2019). 59. Wort,C.J.&Balmer,R.S.Diamondasanelectronicmaterial.Mater.Today11,
30. Peng,Y.,Yan,S.&Lu,Z.Transferlearninginbiomedicalnaturallanguagepro- 22–28(2008).
cessing: an evaluation of BERT and ELMo on ten benchmarking datasets. In: 60. Jalali-Asadabadi,S.etal.Electronicstructureofcrystallinebuckyballs:fcc-C60.J.
Proceedingsofthe18thBioNLPWorkshopandSharedTask,58–65(Association Electron.Mater.45,339–348(2016).
for Computational Linguistics, Florence, Italy, 2019). https://aclanthology.org/ 61. Ward,L.,Agrawal,A.,Choudhary,A.&Wolverton,C.Ageneral-purposemachine
W19-5006. learningframeworkforpredictingpropertiesofinorganicmaterials.npjComput.
31. Lan,Z.etal.ALBERT:AliteBERTforself-supervisedlearningoflanguagerepre- Mater.2,16028(2016).
sentations. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2020). 62. Dunn, A., Wang, Q., Ganose, A., Dopp, D. & Jain, A. Benchmarking materials
https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1eA7AEtvS. propertypredictionmethods:thematbenchtestsetandautomatminerreference
32. Beltagy,I.,Lo,K.&Cohan,A.SciBERT:apretrainedlanguagemodelforscientific algorithm.npjComput.Mater.6,138(2020).
text.In:Proceedingsofthe2019ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNatural 63. Bird,S.,Loper,E.&Klein,E.NaturallanguageprocessingwithPython.O’Reilly
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural MediaInc.(2009).
LanguageProcessing(EMNLP-IJCNLP),3615–3620(AssociationforComputational 64. Shinyama,Y.PDFMiner-PythonPDFParser(2007).
Linguistics,HongKong,China,2019).https://aclanthology.org/D19-1371. 65. Soares,L.B.,FitzGerald,N.,Ling,J.&Kwiatkowski,T.Matchingtheblanks:dis-
33. Araci,D.FinBERT:financialsentimentanalysiswithpre-trainedlanguagemodels. tributionalsimilarityforrelationlearning.arXivhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1906.03158
arXivhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10063(2019). (2019).
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222
L.P.J.Gilliganetal.
14
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
ThisworkhasbeensponsoredbytheIrishResearchCouncil,throughindividualPhD Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
scholarships (L.P.J.G.andM.C.)andtheAdvanceLaureateAward,IRCLA/2019/127. availableathttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-023-01171-9.
Additional support has been provided by the Science Foundation Ireland AMBER
center(12/RC/2278−P2).ThedatabasecollectionatUCDaviswassupportedbythe CorrespondenceandrequestsformaterialsshouldbeaddressedtoStefanoSanvito.
CriticalMaterialsInstitute,anEnergyInnovationHubfundedbytheU.S.Department
of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, and Advanced Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
ManufacturingOffice.WethankJ.K.Byland,ShaoqingDing,RogelioMata,HaleyE. reprints
Magliari, Maxwell G. Wright for the data collection. The authors also thank Rossa
Publisher’snoteSpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaims
BrennanandEmmaHughesfortheirhelpinannotatingthetrainingdatafortheTC inpublishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.
NER model. We acknowledge the DJEI/DES/SFI/HEA Irish Centre for High-End
Computing(ICHEC)andTrinityCentreforHigh-PerformanceComputing(TCHPC)for
theprovisionofcomputationalresources.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
AUTHORCONTRIBUTIONS adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyougive
appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktotheCreative
L.P.J.G.andM.C.bothcontributedtothedesignandimplementationofthepipeline Commonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdparty
and the gathering of training data for each of the models. M.C. trained the RF materialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicense,unless
screeningmodelsforT C.V.T.providedpartofthemanuallyextractedT Cdatabaseand indicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthe
asetofrelevantpdfsusedfortheextraction.S.S.conceivedtheideafortheproject article’sCreativeCommonslicenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory
andsupervisedtheoverallresearch.L.P.J.G.,M.C.,andS.S.composedthemanuscript. regulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
COMPETINGINTERESTS
Theauthorsdeclarenocompetinginterests. ©TheAuthor(s)2023,correctedpublication2024
npjComputationalMaterials(2023)222 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeShanghaiInstituteofCeramicsoftheChineseAcademyofSciences