BERT and fastText Embeddings for Automatic Detection of
Toxic Speech
Ashwin Geet d’Sa, Irina Illina, Dominique Fohr
To cite this version:
Ashwin Geet d’Sa, Irina Illina, Dominique Fohr. BERT and fastText Embeddings for Automatic Detec-
tion of Toxic Speech. SIIE 2020 - Information Systems and Economic Intelligence; International Multi-
Conference on:“Organization of Knowledge and Advanced Technologies”(OCTA), Feb 2020, Tunis, Tunisia.
⟨hal-02448197v2⟩
HAL Id: hal-02448197
https://inria.hal.science/hal-02448197v2
Submittedon1Apr2020
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive L’archiveouvertepluridisciplinaireHAL,estdes-
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re- tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
searchdocuments,whethertheyarepublishedornot. tifiquesdeniveaurecherche,publiésounon,émanant
Thedocumentsmaycomefromteachingandresearch des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
institutionsinFranceorabroad,orfrompublicorpri- français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
vateresearchcenters. privés.
HALAuthorization
BERT and fastText Embeddings for Automatic
Detection of Toxic Speech
Ashwin Geet D’Sa Irina Illina Dominique Fohr
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria,
LORIA, F-54000 LORIA, F-54000 LORIA, F-54000
Nancy, France Nancy, France Nancy, France
ashwin-geet.dsa@loria.fr irina.illina@loria.fr dominique.fohr@loria.fr
Abstract— With the expansion of Internet usage, catering to Toxic content on Internet platform can create fear, anxiety
the dissemination of thoughts and expressions of an individual, and threat to individuals. In the case of company or online
there has been an immense increase in the spread of online hate platform, the company or platform may lose its reputation or
speech. Social media, community forums, discussion platforms the reputation of its product. Failure to moderate these
are few examples of common playground of online discussions contents may cost the company in multiple ways: loss of users,
where people are freely allowed to communicate. However, the drop in stocks2, penalty from legal authority3, etc.
freedom of speech may be misused by some people by arguing
aggressively, offending others and spreading verbal violence. As
TABLE I. EXAMPLES OF TOXIC COMMENTS FROM SOCIAL MEDIA.
there is no clear distinction between the terms offensive, abusive,
hate and toxic speech, in this paper we consider the above Toxic speech
mentioned terms as toxic speech. In many countries, online toxic
She look like a tranny.
speech is punishable by the law. Thus, it is important to
automatically detect and remove toxic speech from online You Asian, they will deport you when they see your eyes.
medias. Through this work, we propose automatic classification
I'm not going to believe any of the stupid rumors I hear about jews being
of toxic speech using embedding representations of words and
friends of Christians.
deep-learning techniques. We perform binary and multi-class
classification using a Twitter corpus and study two approaches: We hate niggers, we hate faggots and we hate spics
(a) a method which consists in extracting of word embeddings
and then using a DNN classifier; (b) fine-tuning the pre-trained TABLE II. EXAMPLES OF EXPLICIT AND IMPLICIT TOXIC SPEECH.
BERT model. We observed that BERT fine-tuning performed
much better. Proposed methodology can be used for any other Explicit toxic speech
type of social media comments. You are a real fag aren't you?
Keywords— Natural language processing, classification, deep Go fuck yourself asswipe!
neural network, hate speech Haha you are a dumb shit.
Implicit toxic speech
I. INTRODUCTION
Affirmative action means we get affirmatively
Hate speech expresses an antisocial behavior. The topics second rate doctors and other professionals.
of the hate can be gender, race, religion, ethnicity, etc. [1].
I will remove all your organs in alphabetical order.
There is no clear definition of the term hate speech. The
Council of European Union defines hate speech as: “All forms She looks like a plastic monkey doll!
of expression which spread, incite, promote or justify racial
hatred, xenophobia, anti-semitism or other forms of hatred Most of the online platforms such as social media or the
based on intolerance, including intolerance expressed by forums, generally cannot be held responsible for the
aggressive nationalism and ethnocentrism, discrimination and propagating of toxic speech. However, their inability to
hostility towards minorities, migrants and people of prevent its use is the reason for the spread of hate. Manual
immigrant origin.”1. As there is no clear distinction between analysis of such content and its moderation are impossible
the terms offensive, abusive, hate and toxic speech, in the because of the huge amount of data circulating on the internet.
following of this paper, we will consider the above mentioned An effective solution to this problem would be the automatic
terms as toxic speech. Table I gives some examples of toxic detection of toxic comments.
comments from social media. In many countries, online hate speech is an offense and it
Toxic speech can be expressed in different forms. Explicit is punishable by the law. In this case, the social medias are
toxic speech contains offensive words such as ‘fuck’, held responsible and accountable if they do not remove hate
‘asshole’. Implicit toxic speech can be realized by a sarcasm speech content promptly.
and an irony [2][3]. While explicit toxic speech can be Automatic detection of toxic speech is a challenging
identified using the lexicons that forms the toxic speech, problem in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP).
implicit toxic speech is often hard to identify and requires The approaches proposed for automatic toxic speech detection
semantic analysis of the sentence. Examples of implicit and are based on the representation of the text in a numerical form
explicit toxic speech are shown in Table II. and on the using of some classification models. In the state-
-
1. https://www.article19.org/data/files/medialibrary/3548/ARTICLE-19- 2. https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2018/07/27/twitter-stock-sinks-
policy-on-prohibition-to-incitement.pdf reporting-decline-active-users/
3. https://www.cnet.com/news/german-hate-speech-law-goes-into-effect-
on-1-jan/
of-the-art on this field, word and character n-grams [4], Term BERT models for different languages. In this paper, we
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF), Bag of propose to use these pre-trained embeddings. In the following
Words (BoW), polar intensity, noun patterns [5] and word of this section, we will describe the embeddings used in this
embedding are largely used as input features. The notion of study.
word embedding is based on the idea that, semantically and fastText embedding: It is an extension of Mikolov’s
syntactically similar words must be close to each other in an embedding [8]. The fastText approach is based on the skip-
n-dimensional space [8]. Global Vectors for word gram model, where each word is represented as a bag of
representation (GloVe) [6] and random embeddings as input character n-grams [16], [17]. A vector representation is
to DNN classifiers has been compared in [7]. Recently, associated to each character n-gram; words being represented
sentence embeddings [9] and Embeddings from Language as the sum of these representations. The word representation
Models (ELMo) [10] were used as input to classifiers for toxic is learned by considering a large window of left and right
comment classification. Multi-features based approach context words. Unlike Mikolov’s embeddings, fastText is able
combining various lexicons and semantic-based features is to provide an embedding for misspelled word, rare words or
presented in [11]. words that were not present in the training corpus, because
Deep-learning techniques have shown to be very powerful fastText uses character n-gram word tokenization.
in classifying toxic speech [7]. For example, Convolutional BERT embedding: Currently BERT (Bidirectional
Neural Network (CNN) are able to capture the local patterns Encoder Representations from Transformers) is one of the
in text [12]. Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) model [13] or most powerful context and word representations [18]. BERT
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) model [14] capture the long is based on the methodology of transformers and uses
range dependencies. Such properties are important for attention mechanism. Attention is a way to look at the
modelling toxic speech [7], [15]. relationship between the words in a given sentence [19].
In this article, we propose a new methodology to Thanks to that, BERT takes into account a very large left and
automatically detect toxic speech. We perform toxic speech right context of a given word. It is important to note that the
classification using two powerful word representations: same word can have different embeddings according to the
fastText and BERT embeddings. These representations are context. For example, the word bank can have one embedding
used as inputs to DNN classifiers, namely CNN and Bi-LSTM when it occurs in the context the bank account and a different
classifiers. We study two cases: binary classification and embedding when it occurs in the context the bank of the river.
multi-class classification. In the last case, we want to classify Moreover, BERT model uses word-piece tokenization. For
toxic speech more finely in hate speech and abusive speech. instance, the word singing can be represented as two word-
Moreover, we explore the capabilities of BERT fine-tuning on pieces: sing and ##ing. The advantage is, that when the word
both binary and multi-class classification tasks. We evaluate is not in the BERT vocabulary, it is possible to split this word
the proposed approaches on the Twitter corpus. into word-pieces. Thus, it is possible to have embeddings for
The contributions of our paper are as follow: rare words, like in fastText.
• We use fastText embeddings and BERT embeddings BERT model can be used in two ways:
as input features to CNN and Bi-LSTM classifiers. • for generating the embeddings of the words of a given
• We perform fine-tuning of the pre-trained BERT sentence. These embeddings are further used as input
model. for DNN classifiers.
• We demonstrate the classification of comments from • for fine-tuning a pre-trained BERT model using a
two perspectives: task-specific corpus and further to perform the
(a) binary classification, where we consider two classification.
classes: non-toxic speech versus toxic speech (hate
speech and offensive speech together). III. THE PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
(b) multi-class classification, where we use three
classes hate speech, offensive speech and neither.
This three-class classification allows to perform fine-
grained distinction between hate and offensive
speech within toxic speech.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the word embeddings. Section III presents the
proposed methodology. Section IV describes data and the
preprossessing. The results are discussed in section V.
II. WORD EMBEDDINGS
The main idea of word embeddings is to project words in
Fig. 1. Proposed methodology
a continuous vector space. In this space, semantically or
syntactically related words should be located in the same area. Fig. 1 shows the proposed methodology. The general idea
An important advantage of word embedding is that their is as follow: we use pre-trained embeddings to represent each
training does not require a labeled corpus. comment in the continuous space. After this, we use these
The embeddings are generally learned from a very huge embeddings as input features for the DNN classifier.
unlabelled corpus. This training is time consuming and often We propose to use the word representations in two ways,
requires high-level technical conditions (big GPU, large feature-based and fine-tuning approaches:
memory, etc.). Pre-trained word embeddings are made • in feature-based approach, two steps are performed.
available via Internet and can be used by researchers from First, each comment is represented as a sequence of
around the world for different NLP tasks. For example, words or word-pieces and for each word or word-
Facebook provided fastText model, Google provided several piece, an embedding is computed using fastText or
BERT. Secondly, this sequence of embeddings will IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
form the input to the DNN classifiers, that takes the
A. Data set
final decision. We use CNN and Bi-LSTM models as
classifiers. For the purpose of toxic classification, we used the Twitter
• in fine-tuning approach, everything is done in a single corpus [20]. The tweets are collected based on keywords from
step. Each comment is classified by a fine-tuned hatebase.org lexicon. The data set contains 24883 tweets and
BERT model. annotations performed by CrowdFlower. Each tweet is
We classify each comment as non-toxic or toxic speech for annotated by at least 3 annotators. The annotator agreement is
binary classification and offensive, hate speech or neither for 92%. The labels correspond to three classes: hate speech,
multi-class classification. offensive language and neither, representing 5.7%, 77.1% and
16.7% respectively. Thus, this data set is an unbalanced data
A. Feature-based approaches set. Table III gives the statistics of the data set after pre-
processing.
For feature-based approaches, we used pre-trained
We followed the 5-fold cross validation procedure as in
fastText and BERT models to obtain the sequence of
[20]. We used 70% of data as training, 20% as test set and 10%
embeddings for a given comment. This sequence of
as development set. The development set is used to choose the
embeddings is used as input features to DNN classifiers. The
hyper-parameters. The test set is used to evaluate the proposed
sequence should have a fixed size. For this, we extend the
approaches.
short tweets by zero padding.
In our experiments, during the binary classification we
fastText model: We use pre-trained fastText embedding
merged hate-speech and offensive speech together in the
model and apply this model to generate one embedding for
single class (toxic speech). Thus, we have toxic speech class
each word of a given comment. Thanks to the bag of character
and non-toxic speech class. For multi-class classification we
n-grams model of fastText, every word in a given comment
use the three classes and the labels provided with the data set:
will have an embedding, even out-of-vocabulary and rare
hate speech, offensive speech and neither.
words.
BERT model: Word-piece tokenization is performed on B. Text pre-prossessing
the comment and then used as input to a pre-trained BERT
Most of the text classifiers results depend on the way the
model. BERT model provides contextual embedding for the
input text is pre-processed. For both, fastText and BERT
word-pieces.
embeddings, we decided to remove the numbers and all the
The obtained embeddings from either fastText or BERT
special characters except ‘!’ , ‘?’, ‘,’, ‘.’ and apostrophe.
models are then used as input to a DNN classifier.
We also performed tweet specific pre-processing. We
B. Deep Neural Networks classifiers removed user names (words beginning with symbol ‘@’). and
the word ‘RT’, indicating re-tweet. We split hast-tags in
For the purpose of toxic tweet classification, we use CNN
multiple words. For example, #KillThemAll is split into Kill
and Bi-LSTM deep neural network classifiers:
Them All.
• CNN were traditionally used in the application of
image processing, and are good at capturing the
TABLE III. STATISTICS OF TWITTER DATA SET AFTER PRE-
patterns. Kim [12] demonstrated the efficient use of
PROCESSING. K DENOTES THOUSAND.
CNN for Natural language processing on various
benchmark tasks. Hate Offensive Neither Total
• Bidirectional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) is a class of RNN speech speech
models, which overcomes the problem of vanishing
Nbr of tweets 1430 19190 4163 24783
gradient problem. Bi-LSTMs are used for sequential
processing of the data and are efficient at capturing Corpus size 19.6K 259.5K 62.1K 341.2K
long-range dependencies. (word count)
C. BERT fine-tuning Nbr of unique 3.7K 16.2K 9.9K 21.2K
The BERT pre-trained model can be fine-tuned to a words
specific task. This consists in the adapting of the pre-trained
Average nbr. of 13.7 13.5 14.9 13.8
BERT model parameters to a specific task using a small
words per tweet
corpus of task specific data. Since BERT is contextual model
and pre-trained BERT model is trained on a very huge corpora C. Embedding models
containing few toxic speech or twitter data, it will be
• fastText embedding: the model is provided by
interesting to fine-tune this model with the toxic and twitter
Facebook 4 and pre-trained on Wikipedia 2017,
specific data set. For the purpose of classification task, a
UMBC webbase and statmt.org news datasets with
neural network layer is used on top of fine-tuned BERT
total 16B tokens. The embedding dimension is 300,
model. So, the weights of this layer and the weights of the
the vocabulary is 1M words.
other layers of the Bert model are trained and fine-tuned
• • BERT model: In our work, we used BERT-base-
correspondingly using task specific data in order to perform
uncased word-piece model (for English), provided by
the classification task.
Google 5 and pre-trained on BookCorpus and
Wikipedia corpora. The model has 12 stacked
transformer encoder layers, with 24 attention heads.
-
4. https://fasttext.cc/docs/en/english-vectors.html 5. https://github.com/google-research/bert
The embedding dimension is 768, the number of offensive data. On the contrary, the BERT fine-tuning
word-pieces is 30K. approach is fine-tuned on twitter data to distinguish hate,
offensive and non-toxic speech and this allow to create more
D. DNN configurations
accurate model for toxic speech.
We perform the classification experiments with different Table VI and VII present the confusion matrices between
hyper-parameters and choose the final configuration based on the 3 classes for multi-class classification: table VI for feature-
the best performance obtained on the development set. The based Bi-LSTM with BERT embeddings and table VII for
best model configurations are detailed below. BERT fine-tuning. We can notice that the main confusions
For Bi-LSTM, we used one or two bidirectional LSTM occur between hate speech and offensive speech. This suggest
layers with varying LSTM units (between 50 and 128) that the model is biased towards classifying tweets as less
followed by one or two dense layers with 64 and 256 dense hateful or offensive than the human annotators. This result is
units in the first dense layer and 16 and 64 dense units in the close to the results obtained in [20]. The feature-based
second layer. For CNN we have used either one or two layers approach is able to detect only 31% of the hate speech tweets,
(filter size between 3 and 5), and used between 16 and 64 units, while Bert fine-tuning achieved 53%. Many fewer tweets are
followed by two dense layers having 64 and 256 dense units in classified as more offensive or hateful than their true category.
the first dense layer and 16 and 64 dense units in the second
layer. The dense units use Rectified Linear Unit activation TABLE IV. MACRO-AVERAGE F1-MEASURE FOR DIFFERENT
(ReLU), while the final output neuron uses sigmoid activation. CLASSIFIERS AND DIFFERENT EMBEDDINGS. BINARY CLASSIFICATION.
We use a varying dropout upto 0.2. We use l2 regularization.
A. Feature-based approaches
The models are trained using Adam optimizer with learning
rate of 0.001. For BERT fine-tuning we used maximum CNN Bi-LSTM
sequence length 256, batch size 16, learning rate 2·10-5 and 3
fastText embedding 91.5 91.9
epochs.
We evaluate the performance of our approaches in terms BERT embedding 90.9 91.9
of macro-average F1-measure. F1-measure is a statistical
B. BERT fine-tuning
measure to analyze classification performance. This value
BERT fine-tuning 97.0
ranges between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates the best
performance. F1-measure is calculated as follow:
2∗(𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛∗𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙) TABLE V. MACRO AVERAGE F1-MEASURES FOR DIFFERENT
𝐹1= CLASSIFIERS AND DIFFERENT EMBEDDINGS. MULTI-CLASS CLASSIFICATION.
(𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛+𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙)
where, precision is the ratio between number of samples A. Feature-based approaches
correctly predicted as class A and total number of samples
CNN Bi-LSTM
predicted as class A by the classifier; recall is the ratio
between number of samples correctly predicted as class A and fastText embedding 70.9 72.3
total number of samples that should be predicted as class A.
BERT embedding 71.9 72.4
Macro-average F1-measure provides the arithmetic mean
B. BERT fine-tuning
of F1-measures of all classes:
𝐶 BERT fine-tuning 84.0
1
𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜𝐹1 = ∑𝐹1
𝐶 𝑖
𝑖=1 TABLE VI. CONFUSION MATRIX FOR FEATURE-BASED BI-LSTM WITH
where, C is the total number of classes. BERT EMBEDDINGS (IN %). MULTI-CLASS CLASSIFICATION.
For each experiment, we compute an average macro-
average F1-measure obtained from the 5-folds test sets. le hate 31 60 9
b
a
l
e
offensive 2 95 3
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION u rT
neither 3 10 87
Table IV gives the macro average F1 results for binary
hate offensive neither
classification task using Bi-LSTM and CNN classifiers with
fastText and BERT embeddings as input features. Table V Predicted labels
presents the macro-averaged F1-measure results for multi-
class classification task.
TABLE VII. CONFUSION MATRIX FOR BERT FINE-TUNING (IN %).
From table IV and table V, it can be observed that both
MULTI-CLASS CLASSIFICATION.
fastText and BERT embeddings provide nearly the same
results. Among the classifiers, Bi-LSTM performs slightly le hate 53 43 4
better than CNN. The performance of binary classification, b a
presented in table IV, is better than multi-class classification
l
e u
offensive 1 98 1
performance, given in table V. This can be explained by the
rT
neither 1 4 95
fact that it is difficult to distinguish between hate speech and hate offensive neither
offensive speech.
Finally, BERT fine-tuning performs better than Predicted labels
featurebased approaches in both binary as well as in multi-
class classification: compared to feature-based approaches,
VI. CONCLUSION
we obtained 63% and 42% of classification error reduction for
binary and multi-class classification correspondingly. One In this article, we proposed new approaches for automatic
reason may be that in the feature-based approach the toxic speech detection in the social media. These approaches
embeddings vectors have not been trained on hate speech or are based on deep learning classifiers and word embeddings.
We have explored the classification from two perspectives- [7] P. Badjatiya, S. Gupta, M. Gupta, and V. Varma, “Deep Learning for
binary classification and multi-class classification. For binary Hate Speech Detection in Tweets”, in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. World Wide
Web Companion - WWW 17 Companion, pp. 759–760, 2017.
classification we consider ‘toxic speech’ (hate speech and
[8] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient Estimation
offensive speech together) and ‘non-toxic speech’. For multi-
of Word Representations in Vector Space”, ArXiv13013781 Cs, Jan.
class, we considered hate speech, offensive speech and
2013.
neither.
[9] V. Indurthi, B. Syed, M. Shrivastava, N. Chakravartula, M. Gupta, and
We proposed feature-based approaches and fine-tuning of V. Varma, “FERMI at SemEval-2019 Task 5: Using Sentence
pre-trained BERT model. In feature-based approaches, embeddings to Identify Hate Speech Against Immigrants and Women
fastText and BERT embeddings are used as input features to in Twitter”, in Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation, 2019, pp. 70–74.
CNN and Bi-LSTM classifiers. Further, we have compared
these configurations with fine-tuning of pre-trained BERT [10] M. Bojkovský and M. Pikuliak, “STUFIIT at SemEval-2019 Task 5:
Multilingual Hate Speech Detection on Twitter with MUSE and ELMo
model.
Embeddings”, in Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on
We observed that BERT fine-tuning performed much Semantic Evaluation, 2019, pp. 464–468.
better than feature-based approaches on a Twitter corpus. The [11] S. Almatarneh, P. Gamallo, and F. J. R. Pena, “CiTIUS-COLE at
main confusions occur between offensive speech and hate SemEval-2019 Task 5: Combining Linguistic Features to Identify Hate
speech. In the future work, we want to investigate this Speech Against Immigrants and Women on Multilingual Tweets”, in
Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Semantic
problem.
Evaluation, 2019, pp. 387–390.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT [12] Y. Kim, “Convolutional Neural Networks for Sentence Classification”,
in Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in
This work was funded by the M-PHASIS project Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2014, pp. 1746–1751.
supported by the French National Research Agency (ANR) [13] A. Baruah, F. Barbhuiya, and K. Dey, “ABARUAH at SemEval-2019
and German National Research Agency (DFG) under contract Task 5 : Bi-directional LSTM for Hate Speech Detection”, in
ANR-18-FRAL-0005. Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation, 2019, pp. 371–376.
REFERENCES [14] K. Cho, B. V. Merrienboer, C. Gulcehre , D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares ,
H. Schwenk, Y. Bengio. “Learning Phrase Representations using RNN
[1] R. Delgado and J. Stefancic, “Hate Speech in Cyberspace”, Social Encoder–Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation,” in Proceedings
Science Research Network, Rochester, NY, 2014. of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
[2] Z. Waseem, T. Davidson, D. Warmsley, and I. Weber, “Understanding Processing (EMNLP), 2014, pp. 1724–1734.
Abuse: A Typology of Abusive Language Detection Subtasks,” in [15] S. Bodapati, S. Gella, K. Bhattacharjee, Y. Al-Onaizan “Neural Word
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Abusive Language Online, 2017, Decomposition Models for Abusive Language Detection”. In
pp. 78–84. Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abusive Language Online, pp.
[3] L. Gao, A. Kuppersmith, and R. Huang, “Recognizing Explicit and 135-145, 2019.
Implicit Hate Speech Using a Weakly Supervised Two-path [16] A. Joulin, E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, M. Douze, H. Jégou, and T.
Bootstrapping Approach,” in Proceedings of the Eighth International Mikolov, “FastText.zip: Compressing Text Classification Models”,
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv161203651, 2016.
Papers), 2017, pp. 774–782.
[17] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enriching Word
[4] C. Nobata, J. Tetreault, A. Thomas, Y. Mehdad, and Y. Chang, Vectors with Subword Information,” Transactions of the Association
“Abusive Language Detection in Online User Content”, in Proceedings for Computational Linguistics, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 135–146, 2017.
of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web, Republic
[18] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-
and Canton of Geneva, Switzerland, 2016, pp. 145–153.
training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
[5] M. Wiegand, J. Ruppenhofer, A. Schmidt, and C. Greenberg, Understanding,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
“Inducing a Lexicon of Abusive Words–a Feature-Based Approach,” American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
Technologies, Volume 1, 2018, pp. 1046–1056.
[19] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is All You Need,” in Advances in neural
[6] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. Manning, “Glove: Global Vectors for information processing systems, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
Word Representation”, in Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
[20] T. Davidson, D. Warmsley, M. Macy, and I. Weber, “Automated Hate
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2014,
Speech Detection and the Problem of Offensive Language,” in
pp. 1532–1543.
Eleventh international aaai conference on web and social media, 2017.