International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning
Volume 23, Number 2
May – 2022
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive
Classification of MOOCs
Hanane Sebbaq and Nour-eddine El Faddouli
RIME Team, MASI Laboratory, E3S Research Center, Mohammadia School of Engineers (EMI), Mohammed V University,
Rabat, Morocco
Abstract
The quality assurance of MOOCs focuses on improving their pedagogical quality. However, the tools that
allow reflection on and assistance regarding the pedagogical aspects of MOOCs are limited. The pedagogical
classification of MOOCs is a difficult task, given the variability of MOOCs' content, structure, and designs.
Pedagogical researchers have adopted several approaches to examine these variations and identify the
pedagogical models of MOOCs, but these approaches are manual and operate on a small scale. Furthermore,
MOOCs do not contain any metadata on their pedagogical aspects. Our objective in this research work was
the automatic and large-scale classification of MOOCs based on their learning objectives and Bloom’s
taxonomy. However, the main challenge of our work was the lack of annotated data. We created a dataset
of 2,394 learning objectives. Due to the limited size of our dataset, we adopted transfer learning via
bidirectional encoder representations from Transformers (BERT). The contributions of our approach are
twofold. First, we automated the pedagogical annotation of MOOCs on a large scale and based on the
cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. Second, we fine-tuned BERT via different architectures. In addition
to applying a simple softmax classifier, we chose prevalent neural networks long short-term memory
(LSTM) and Bi-directional long short-term memory (Bi-LSTM). The results of our experiments showed, on
the one hand, that choosing a more complex classifier does not boost the performance of classification. On
the other hand, using a model based on dense layers upon BERT in combination with dropout and the
rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function enabled us to reach the highest accuracy value.
Keywords: cognitive MOOC classification, BERT, LSTM, transfer learning
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Introduction
At the end of 2019, the spread of COVID-19 has caused a worldwide change in teaching from face-to-face to
virtual or semi-virtual models. To ensure the continuity and efficacy of the learning process, many
universities have turned to e-learning and especially MOOCs, and many professors use MOOCs to provide
their academic courses. However, there are challenges to overcome, such as course design and quality.
Quality, as it relates to the pedagogical framework of e-learning systems is the cornerstone for learning
success and effectiveness (Conole, 2016) and it must be subject to constant monitoring and improvement.
The quality assurance of e-learning systems can be guaranteed by applying quality instructional design
(Kopp & Lackner, 2014) and by analyzing an important aspect of the teaching and learning process, namely
the definition of learning objectives (LOs) associated with modules and programs. LOs are central to
teaching and learning in many higher education institutions. However, teachers have limited tools to help
them reflect on the LOs in the courses they create (Swart & Daneti, 2019). Our research aimed to assist
teachers by recommending appropriate content based on their research (Sebbaq & al, 2020) and,
importantly, on the cognitive level of their LOs. In our previous work (Sebbaq & Faddouli, 2021), we
proposed a pedagogically enriched massive online open course (MOOC) ontology, that served as a standard
to unify the representation of MOOCS and facilitate interoperability between MOOCs platforms. We
enriched this ontology with metadata about learning objectives classified according to Bloom’s taxonomy.
This ontology served as a basis for the design and implementation of a linked data repository. We
automatically extracted semantically rich descriptive metadata from different MOOC providers and
integrate this metadata into a repository accessible through a simple protocol and RDF query language
(SPARQL) endpoint. This repository served as the basis for our recommendation framework.
To concretize the epistemological position of the pedagogical dimension of MOOCs, we mapped MOOC
learning objectives and Bloom’s taxonomy levels. However, one of the limitations of our previous research
work has been that the process of MOOC classification remained manual, which was tedious given its large
scale. Therefore, the automation of classifying MOOCs according to their cognitive level remained an open
research question. In this work, we proposed an approach for the cognitive classification of MOOCs. To the
best of our knowledge and according to our literature review, there is no relevant study on automatic and
large-scale pedagogical classification of MOOCs.
To study the pedagogies most suited to large-scale learning and teaching, and to highlight the special
characteristics and properties of these pedagogies, several studies have compared existing pedagogies and
case studies on MOOCs. Those studies analyzed the pedagogies used and proposed mechanisms and
guidelines to improve the quality of MOOCs’ pedagogical design. Analysis and classification of MOOCS was
a difficult task, given the variability of MOOC structures, contents, designs, platforms, providers, and
learner profiles. According to our literature review, the pedagogical classification of MOOCs has often been
manual, as well as restricted to a limited number of MOOCs whose metadata are extracted manually and
on a reduced scale. The objective of our work was to propose an automatic and large-scale pedagogical
classification system for MOOCs according to their learning objectives. As we relied on the learning
objectives for classification, we adopted the six cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. The main constraint
related to our study was the absence of annotated data—there is no dataset of annotated learning objectives
organized according to the cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. To overcome this problem, we resorted to
building our dataset.
171
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
We managed to build a dataset of 2,394 LOs but this size remained limited. The transfer learning technique
has demonstrated its performance on small datasets. We proposed a model based on bidirectional encoder
representations from Transformers (BERT) for the cognitive classification of MOOCs using various fine-
tuning strategies, and we examined the effect of different classifiers upon layers of BERT. Our experiment
results showed, on the one hand, that using the pre-trained BERT model and fine-tuning it by adding dense
layers outperformed the use of more complex classifiers like long short-term memory (LSTM) or (Bi-
LSTM). On the other hand, using dense layers upon BERT in combination with dropout and the rectified
linear unit (ReLU) activation function helped avoid overfitting.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is a literature review. Section 3 describes the
methodologies. Section 4 shows the experimental study. Section 5 answers the research questions and
Section 6 is a conclusion.
Literature Review
Pedagogical Classification of MOOCs
To improve the quality of the instructional design of MOOCs, several studies have carried out comparisons
of pedagogies that are most suited to large-scale learning and teaching, and that highlight the special
characteristics and properties of these pedagogies. However, analysis and classification of MOOCs have
been a difficult task given the variability of MOOC content, structure, designs, and providers. Educational
researchers have adopted several approaches to understand these variations and identify the pedagogical
models that exist in the pedagogical design of MOOCs. Kopp and Lackner (2014) studied MOOC models
and designs. They structured these elements into a comprehensive checklist in the form of a framework to
assist teachers in the design and development of a MOOC. However, this framework was descriptive and
did not specify the characteristics associated with either the MOOC dimensions or assessment. Yousef et al.
(2014) conducted research that classified MOOC quality criteria in two dimensions and six categories,
which were manifested via 74 criteria. However, this study did not go further to evaluate MOOCs based on
these criteria.
After a review of classification and description systems of existing MOOCs, Major and Blackmon (2016)
proposed a descriptive framework with 11 dimensions including the educational dimension. Nevertheless,
they did not go as far as pedagogical assessment. Similarly, to describe MOOCs, Rosselle et al. (2014)
mapped eight dimensions to various characteristics of MOOCs. However, no assessment system was
proposed. This mapping was an extension of that proposed by Pardos and Schneider (2013) who provided
a conceptual mapping of MOOC designs. They categorized five main dimensions, which included four
elements of the learning environment that could potentially affect design—instruction, content, assessment,
and community.
To provide teachers with the guidance and the assistance they need to make better design decisions, Conole
(2014) offered the 7Cs of learning design framework. This framework can be used for both designing and
evaluating MOOCs. Moreover, Conole (2016) has also offered a 12-dimensional framework as well as a
172
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
rating scale (low, medium, or high). These dimensions covered structural, philosophical, and pedagogical
aspects, though the organizational system can be confusing. In addition, the assessment of some
dimensions was unclear. Margaryan et al. (2015) proposed the course scan assessment system, a 37-item
checklist based on existing instruments for quality instructional design. Margaryan et al. evaluated a sample
of 76 MOOCs using the three dimensions: (a) course details (7 elements); (b) objectives and organization
(6 elements); and (c) pedagogical principles (24 elements). The MOOCs evaluated were a random sample
of those available at the end of 2013 on various platforms.
Based on an approach focused on pedagogy Swan et al. (2014) offered the MOOC assessing MOOC pedagogy
(AMP) tool for evaluating pedagogy. The AMP generates a specific MOOC profile based on 10 pedagogical
dimensions: (a) epistemology, (b) role of the teacher, (c) orientation of activities, (d) structure, (e) approach
to content, (f) feedback, (g) cooperative learning, (h) adaptation to individual differences, (i) activities and
evaluation, and (j) user’s roles. The rating scale ranged from 0 to 5. Quintana and Tan (2019) introduced
an extended version of the AMP tool with modified terminology and more sophisticated indicators. After
evaluating 20 MOOCs (from the same platform and institution, but different fields), they showed how
machine learning with the k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) algorithm helped identify pedagogically similar
MOOCs. Xing (2019), using machine learning for the classification of MOOCs, analyzed 205 MOOCs to
identify clusters of MOOCs using the k-means algorithm. Their goal was to study the impact of design
features on learner engagement. Davis et al. (2018) used hierarchical clustering to group MOOCs according
to their structures. They manually collected data from 177 MOOCs and looked only at the MOOCs’
structures. An automatic notation was made by calculating the similarities via the two approaches
(clustering transition probability and trajectory mining).
Table 1 summarizes the works reviewed here and classifies them according to whether their objective was
description or evaluation. Information on the number of MOOCs analyzed is also provided to assess the
large-scale character of the classification, while the data gathering column indicates whether the study
gathered data automatically or manually. The third point of comparison shows whether the work integrated
a MOOC assessment tool and whether it was automatic or manual. The sixth aspect of comparison deals
with the use of machine learning for automating the classification, and the last column addresses the use of
a theoretical foundation.
Table 1
Comparing Studies That Classify MOOCs
Research Research Number Data Assessmen Assessment Machine Theoretical
paper objective of gathering t tool method learning foundation
MOOCs method
analyzed
Conole Description - - Yes (low, Manual - Good learning
(2014) medium,
high)
Conole Description - - Yes Manual - Good learning
(2016) Evaluation (7Cs of principles
learning design)
173
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Major and Description - - - - - -
Blackmon
(2016)
Pardos Description - Yes Manual - Online
and Evaluation learning
Schneider
(2013)
Rosselle et Description - - - - - -
al. (2014)
Kopp and Description - - - - - ADDIE,
Lackner Molenda
(2014) (2003)
Yousef et Description - - - - - -
al. (2014)
Swan et al. Pedagogical 17 Manual AMP tool Manual - -
(2014) evaluation
Margaryan Evaluation 76 Manual Course scan Manual - Merrill
et al.
(2015)
Xing Evaluation 205 Manual Yes Manual K-means Web-based
(2019) online
instruction
Davis et al. Evaluation 177 Manual Calculate Automatic Hierarchical -
(2018) similarities clustering
Quintana Evaluation (AMP 20 Manual Expanded Manual k-NN -
and Tan tool extension) AMP
(2019) instrument
Pedagogical Classification of E-Learning Content Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy
Classification based on Bloom’s taxonomy makes use of Bloom’s taxonomy action verbs (BTAV). Swart and
Daneti (2019) and Nevid and McClelland (2013) used BTAV to manually classify LOs. This time-consuming
task required the participation of educational specialists in order to assure accurate outcomes. On the other
hand, some verbs in the BTAV are unclear, since determining the necessary cognitive level is challenging.
Verbs such as choose, describe, design, explain, show, and use can be found at different levels of cognition.
The use of Bloom’s taxonomy to classify e-learning content (e.g., questions, forum texts) has received
considerable attention in recent years. For automatic classification, researchers have used a variety of
methodologies, ranging from rule-based to traditional machine learning to deep learning approaches. In
the 1980s, the rule-based approach was the most popular. Omar (2012) and Haris and Omar (2012)
demonstrated the effectiveness of the rule-based approach, although it was not without flaws. Among these
disadvantages was the requirement for professionals to manually construct many rules to cover all sorts
and domains of inquiries in order to improve the accuracy of the output.
When it comes to e-learning content, researchers have been mainly interested in evaluation questions.
Abduljabbar and Omar (2015) combined three classifiers—support vector machine (SVM), nearest
174
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
neighbor (NB), and k-nearest neighbor (k-NN)—and found that using an only bag of words (BOW) feature
extraction improved accuracy. In 2020, Mohammed and Omar (2020) used a combination of Term
Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF), Part Of Speech (POS), and word2vec for feature
extraction and tested the classifiers (i.e., k-NN, logistic regression (LR), and SVM). This combination,
according to their research, increased F1-measurement performance. Osman and Yahya (2016) combined
multiple feature extraction (BOW, POS, and n-grams) techniques with different machine learning
algorithms (i.e., NB, SVM, LR, and decision trees) in order to test and compare them. Their research
revealed that the feature extraction technique used had an impact on the machine learning classifier’s
performance.
Some studies have used a deep learning-based approach to classify e-learning content according to the six
cognitive levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy. Ting Fei et al. (2003) examined the application of automated
question classification tests in e-learning systems. They presented a text classification model that used a
back-propagation learning approach to train a text classifier using an artificial neural network. Their
technology outperformed the competition by about 78% in terms of F1 value. Yusof and Hui (2010) used an
artificial neural network (ANN) strategy that employed numerous feature reduction strategies to develop a
model that categorized question items. Das et al. (2020) proposed two strategies for automatically
estimating the cognitive learning challenges of given questions. Their first method used latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA) as a deep learning strategy. For multi-class text classification, the second methodology
employed BERT. According to their findings, BERT had an accuracy of 89%, which was higher than LDA’s
83%.
BERT for Text Classification
The BERT model is based on two stages: pre-training and fine-tuning (Devlin et al., 2019). During pre-
training, the model is trained on a large unlabeled corpus. The model is then fine-tuned, starting with the
pre-trained parameters and refining all parameters with task-specific labeled data. BERT uses the
transformer that is a new architecture presented in Vaswani et al. (2017). A simple transformer consists of
an encoder that reads text input and a decoder that generates a task prediction. BERT requires only the
encoder depicted in Figure 1 because its objective is to develop a model of the language representation.
175
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Figure 1
The BERT Encoder
BERT is based on the attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) that was invented to allow a model to
comprehend and remember the contextual relationships between features and text. The attention
mechanism maps a set of queries to their corresponding sets of keys and values—vectors that contain
information about related or neighboring entities from the text input. The procedure involves the dot
product of the input query with the existing keys, and then a softmax to give a scaled dot product attention
score, which is defined as follows (Vaswani et al., 2017):
𝑇𝑇
𝑄𝑄𝐾𝐾
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴(𝑄𝑄,𝐾𝐾,𝑉𝑉)=𝑠𝑠𝐴𝐴𝑠𝑠𝐴𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠( )𝑉𝑉
�𝑑𝑑𝑘𝑘
where Q is the query matrix, K is the key matrix, V is the value matrix, and d is the dimension of the Q and
k
K matrices. This resulting score vector is then multiplied by each value and summed to give the final self-
attention result for that particular query. Interpretation of this multi-head attention helps the model
determine how much attention it should pay to each word in the text block (Vaswani et al., 2017). Multi-
head attention is defined as follows:
𝑂𝑂
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑀𝑀𝐴𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑑(𝑄𝑄,𝐾𝐾,𝑉𝑉)=𝐶𝐶𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑠𝑠𝐴𝐴(ℎ𝐴𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑑1,…,ℎ𝐴𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑑ℎ)𝑊𝑊
where head = Attention (QWQ, KWK , V WV) and the projections are parameter matrices WQ ℝ dmodel×dk ,
i i i i i
WK ℝ dmodel×dk , WV ℝ dmodel×dv, and WO ℝ hdv×dmodel (Vaswani et al., 2017).
i i
∈
∈ ∈ ∈
BERT represents a single sentence or a pair of sentences as a sequence of tokens with the following
characteristics:
• The first token in the sequence is [CLS].
• When there is a pair of sentences in the sequence, they are separated by the token [SEP].
• For a given token, its input representation is constructed by summing the corresponding token,
position, and segment embeddings (see Figure 2).
176
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Figure 2
BERT Architecture
BERT is a leading model for a variety of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, demonstrating its
efficiency and potential. In this study, we explored fine-tuning methods for applying BERT to a cognitive
classification task.
Methodology
Theoretical Foundation of Our Proposed Approach
According to our comparative study summarized in Table 1, several theoretical frameworks have been
adopted for the evaluation and classification of MOOCs. Conole (2014) associated good learning with
quality learning. It was critical, in his opinion, to meet the characteristics of good learning in order to
accomplish effective learning. Conole (2016) based the12-dimensional assessment framework, as well as
the 7Cs for learning design framework on this principle. On the other hand, according to Merrill (2012), the
first principles of instruction he proposed constituted the foundation of all present pedagogical models and
theories. Merill suggested five guidelines for the development of learning activities. Margaryan et al. (2015)
built on Merill’s first principles of instruction and added five more principles related to learning resources.
Conole (2014, 2016) and Magrayan et al. (2015) used these two theoretical frameworks to drive their
research into the development of evaluation frameworks focused on open-ended questions and
necessitating the assistance of an expert. Xing (2019) used a Web-based online instruction approach to
drive their evaluation of MOOCs. This approach was more generic and incorporated three global design
dimensions: information, instruction, and learning. All the frameworks adopted in these studies focused on
open-ended questions and called for expert assistance, while our research objective was to automate the
evaluation of LOs.
The ultimate aim of our research was to evaluate and classify the pedagogical dimension of MOOCs based
on their learning objectives. The theoretical foundation of Bloom’s taxonomy was most appropriate for our
context since it covered the different levels of cognitive learning and allowed for classifying learning
objectives according to six hierarchical levels. The initial purpose of Bloom’s taxonomy was to assist
teachers in developing rubrics and measuring the achievement of their learning goals by providing
177
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
guidelines. We used a modification of Bloom’s taxonomy adapted from Krathwohl (2002) who proposed a
revision of the original taxonomy. It defined a two-dimensional framework consisting of knowledge and
cognitive processes. The first dimension took the subcategories of the first level of the original taxonomy;
the second dimension renamed the six levels as verbs—remembering, understanding, applying, analyzing,
evaluating, and creating. Our research considered the dimension of cognitive learning processes.
Most studies that have classified e-learning content based on Bloom’s taxonomy focused on classifying
assessment questions. No research has been done on the automatic classification of LOs. Machine learning
has been used most often, followed by the rule-based approach. The majority of research publications have
focused on merging multiple feature extraction and feature selection methods to improve the performance
of machine learning classifiers. The deep learning approach has been used less often; only the ANN
architecture has been tested in this context. BERT was used in a single study for cognitive classification
purposes (Das et al., 2020). There has been some research comparing BERT and other machine learning or
deep learning models (González-Carvajal & Garrido-Merchán, 2020). Our research, on the other hand, is
the first to investigate the cognitive classification of LOs.
A BERT-Based Cognitive Approach for Classifying MOOCs
From our review of the literature, we have deduced that there is no large-scale, automatic classification
system for MOOCs based on their pedagogical approaches. As we summarized in Table 1, the existing
research has addressed one of the following:
• Frameworks developed for quality assurance that are generalist and lack educational
considerations and means to operationalize the review of MOOCs’ pedagogical quality.
• Case studies that detailed the design of individual MOOCs to highlight best practices and
pedagogical models. However, these studies concerned only a small number of MOOCs and were
not based on a well-defined evaluation framework.
• Descriptive frameworks that were intended for designing MOOCs from scratch, which was not our
objective.
• Evaluation frameworks that dealt with several dimensions including the pedagogical.
However, not all frameworks of the latter type were focused on pedagogy, and they all suffered from the
lack of an automatic and large-scale system for classifying MOOCs according to their pedagogical models.
In addition, their dimensions were broad and had to be operationalized via qualitative and quantitative
indicators as well as concrete characteristics. This research analyzed course design and pedagogy to
understand variations in the two, but much of this analysis relied on a human categorization process based
on broad interpretations of the learning designs. In addition, Assessment tools were based on open-ended
questions that required the intervention of an expert. Since it is difficult to automate the assessment, this
has remained a manual task and automated tools are not yet widely adopted by researchers in the MOOC
community. The only study whose assessment was automatic, Davis et al. (2018) was restricted to
comparing MOOC structures, similar to Pardos and Schneider (2013). Our objective was to classify MOOCs
on a large scale; the number of MOOCs analyzed in the research cited above was not sufficient to deduce
178
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
the different pedagogies in MOOCs. Both Xing (2019) and Davis et al. (2018) used machine learning for a
large analysis of MOOCs. However, the number of MOOCs they examined remained limited, and their data
collection methods were manual. Swan et al. (2014) used machine learning for the analysis of about 20
MOOCs. Nevertheless, the result of their clustering cannot be generalized given the limited number of
MOOCs they analyzed.
The main challenge of our study was the lack of annotated data. Despite thorough research, we found no
annotated learning goal datasets, so we created our learning objectives dataset. Evens so, the size of the
dataset remained limited. For its part, BERT is the state-of-the-art technique in NLP (Devlin et al., 2018)
and it has demonstrated its performance on small datasets. The contributions of this study are:
• The automatic classification of MOOCs according to their pedagogical approaches based on the
cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. The first phase of our automated approach has been
implemented in our previous work (Sebbaq & Faddouli, 2021).
• The large scale of our approach was based on the repository of MOOCs already built in our previous
work (Sebbaq & Faddouli, 2021).
• The use of transfer learning to resolve the issue of the lack of annotated data.
• Fine-tuning BERT via different strategies: we investigated the impact of choosing different
classifiers, from a simple softmax classifier to a more complex classifier like dense layers, LSTM,
and Bi-LSTM.
Fine-Tuning Strategies
BERT fine-tuning involves training a classifier with different layers on top of the pre-trained BERT
transformer to minimize task-specific parameters. Fine-tuning for a specific task can be done using several
approaches, either by fine-tuning the architecture or by fine-tuning different hyper-parameters such as the
learning rate or the choice of the best optimization algorithm. Our objective in this research work was the
cognitive classification of MOOCs according to their learning objectives. For this type of classification
problem, we simply adopted the basic architecture of BERT and then added an output layer for the
classification. This layer took as input the final hidden state of the first token [CLS]. We considered this exit
to be the ultimate representation of the entire entry sequence. The output layer can be either a simple
classifier like softmax or a more complicated network like the bidirectional Bi-LSTM. In our approach, we
proposed six different architectures for fine-tuning BERT.
BERT-Based Fine-Tuning
Figure 3 represents the first architecture. In this basic architecture, we mainly relied on the BERT base; we
used the output of the token [CLS] provided by BERT only. The output [CLS] was a vector of size 768; we
gave it as input to a network that was fully connected with no hidden layer. Since our classification problem
was multi-class, the output layer was based on a softmax activation layer. The softmax function formula is:
zi
𝐴𝐴
𝜎𝜎(𝑧𝑧⃗)= 𝐾𝐾 𝑧𝑧𝑧𝑧
∑𝑧𝑧=1𝐴𝐴
179
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
=
where (z; : : : ; z ) , z values are the elements of the input vector to the softmax function, K is the
1 K i
number of classes in the multi-class classifier. The output node with the highest probability is then chosen
as the p𝑧𝑧⃗redicted label for the input.
For preprocessing, we simply cleaned the text of non-alphabetic characters and converted it to lower case.
Figure 3
BERT-Based Fine-Tuning Architecture
In this architecture (see Figure 4), we added fully connected layers. The fully connected layer took the
output of BERT’s 12 layers and transformed it into the final output of six classes that represented the six
cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. This layer consists of three dense layers.
180
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Figure 4
BERT With Fully Connected Layers Architecture
In previous architectures, the [CLS] output was the only one used as input for the classifier. In this
architecture, we used all the outputs of the last transformer encoder as inputs to an LSTM or Bi-LSTM
recurrent neural network as shown in Figure 5. After the input was processed, the network sent the final
hidden state to the output layer, which was a fully connected network, to perform classification using the
softmax activation function. We also experimented with architecture that was more complex by inserting
dense layers between the deep network layer and the output layer.
181
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Figure 5
BERT With Fully Connected Layers and Deep Network Layers Architecture
Experimental Study
In this section, we provide a representation and a detailed analysis of the dataset as well as a complete
presentation of the results that we obtained from experimentation with the different models.
Dataset Description and Analysis
Given the challenge posed by the lack of annotated datasets of LOs according to the cognitive levels of
Bloom’s taxonomy, our solution was to create our dataset as presented in Table 2. We started by collecting
LOs from the MOOCs providers, Coursera, and edX, and then manually annotated them based on Bloom’s
taxonomy action verbs list. However, some of the action verbs in BTAV overlap at several levels of the
hierarchy (Krathwohl, 2002). This leads to ambiguity about the actual meaning of the required cognition
(Stanny, 2016) and affects the effectiveness of the BTAV-based classification. Moreover, this method has
the drawback of not being able to guarantee the accuracy of our annotations, as well as being time-
consuming.
182
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Table 2
The Distribution of LOs in Our Dataset
Cognitive level 2 394 Example
Knowledge 400 Describe the concept of modular programming and the uses of the
(remembering) function in computer programming
Comprehension 400 At the end of this module, the learner will be able to classify clustering
(understanding) algorithms based on the data and cluster requirements
Application 400 Apply a design process to solve object-oriented design problems
(applying )
Analysis 400 Analyze the appropriate quantization algorithm
(analyzing )
Evaluation 394 Compare the semantic and syntactic ways encapsulation
(evaluating )
Synthesis 400 Create a Docker container in which you will implement a Web
(creating) application by using a flask in a Linux environment
The training dataset consisted of 2,394 training objectives. Figure 6 illustrates the number of words per
input data point in the form of a histogram. According to the histogram, the average length of the training
objectives was about 225. Regarding the class distribution of the data in the input dataset, analysis of Figure
6 suggests that the classes are balanced, with 400 learning objectives per cognitive level.
Figure 6
Distribution of Data by Level and Item Length
Evaluation Metrics
Several considerations, including class balance and expected outcomes, guided the selection of the best
measures to evaluate the performance of a given classifier on a certain dataset. Given a dataset with an
183
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
approximately balanced number of samples from all classes, we used the accuracy measure to evaluate the
performance of our model and compare it with other models (Grandini et al., 2020). Accuracy is the sum
of true positive (TP) and true negative (TN) items divided by the sum of all other possibilities, defined as
follows:
𝐴𝐴𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑀𝑀𝐴𝐴𝑠𝑠𝐶𝐶𝐴𝐴 = (𝑇𝑇 𝑃𝑃 + 𝑇𝑇 𝑁𝑁 )/(𝑇𝑇 𝑃𝑃 + 𝑇𝑇 𝑁𝑁 + 𝐹𝐹 𝑃𝑃 + 𝐹𝐹 𝑁𝑁)
where TP = True Positives, TN = True Negatives, FN = False Negatives, and FP = False Positives.
Environment Setup
We used the Google Colab and Tensorflow environment as well as Keras Tensorflow to build the BERT
models. Keras TensorFlow is an open-source mathematical software library used for machine learning
applications. It has tools to run on graphic processing units, which can significantly reduce training and
inference times on some models. Keras is a high-level API for TensorFlow. It has a modular and easily
extensible architecture, and it allows users to create sequential models or a graph of modules that can be
easily combined. The library contains many different types of neural layers, cost, and activation functions.
We implemented different fine-tuning strategies of BERT on Tensorflow Hub (TFHub). TFHub provides a
way to try, test, and reuse machine learning models.
Implementation Details
For our experiments, we used the basic pre-trained model bert_multi_cased_L-12_H-768_A-12/2, which
had 12 layers, 768 hidden, 12 self-attention heads, and 110M parameters. We used the Adam optimizer,
which is one of the most stable and widely used in the deep learning world (Kingma & Ba, 2014). Adam was
used in combination with the warmup steps, which were low learning-rate updates that helped the model
converge. After trying many different configurations, and after numerous unsuccessful attempts that ran
out of memory, we arrived at a working configuration of hyper-parameters. The base learning rate was 3e-
5, and the warm-up proportion was 0.1. We empirically set the maximum number of epochs to 15 with a
batch size of 32 and saved the best model on the validation set for testing.
For the implementation of the models adopted, we use the Keras Layer function of Tensorflow Hub to build
our BERT layer. Then we tokenized our text based on the variables of this layer. This allowed us to have the
first input of our BERT model, which was input_word_ids. Then we built the two other inputs of BERT,
which were the embeddings of position input_mask and segments segment_ids. We added a dropout of 0.1
after each layer.
Results Analysis
We conducted experiments to demonstrate the efficiency of our proposed approach in terms of
performance. Our main task was to explore the performance of BERT on cognitive text classification and
evaluate the impact of different fine-tuning strategies. We used six models: (a) standard BERT-based fine-
tuning, (b) BERT with fully connected layers, (c) BERT with LSTM, (d) BERT with Bi-LSTM, (e) BERT with
both LSTM and fully connected layers, and (f) BERT with both Bi-LSTM and fully connected layers.
184
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
In particular, we aimed to answer the following research questions via our experiments.
• (RQ1): How do different fine-tuning strategies have different impacts on the cognitive classification
task?
• (RQ2): How effectively does our BERT-based cognitive approach produce better results than other
baseline fine-tuning strategies?
(RQ1) Comparing Performance of Various Architectures With Different Classifiers
In order to answer (RQ1), we investigated the effects of various classifiers on BERT. To use a basic softmax
classifier upon the last layer of BERT, we experimented with a cascade of dense layers with the activation
function ReLU and the more complex classifiers, LSTM and Bi-LSTM. Table 3 presents the accuracies of
the six models ranked from the basic to the more complicated. The results demonstrate that the use of a
more complex classifier did not improve performance. Instead, it lowered accuracy on the five classification
models, which is understandable given that BERT also has deep networks and advanced training
techniques.
(RQ2) BERT With Three Dense Layers Performed Best
As a response to (RQ2), our proposed model performs better than other baseline fine-tuning strategies.
Thanks to the addition of dense layers on top of BERT. A dense layer is a regular, deeply connected neural
network layer of neurons. Each neuron in the previous layer receives feedback from all the neurons in the
layer before it, making it densely connected. To prevent overfitting, we also used the dropout, a
regularization technique where randomly selected neurons are ignored during training. At each upgrade of
the training process, dropout randomly set the outgoing edges of hidden units to zero at random. We added
a dropout of 0.1 after each dense layer. We used the activation function ReLU. The biggest benefit of using
the ReLU mechanism over other activation functions was that it did not simultaneously stimulate any of
the neurons.
Table 3
Accuracies of the Different Models
BERT Model Accuracy
BERT-based fine-tuning 88.75%
BERT with three fully connected layers 92.5%
BERT with LSTM 91.25%
BERT with Bi-LSTM 90.83%
BERT with three fully connected layers + LSTM 91.46%
BERT with three fully connected layers + Bi-LSTM 92.08%
185
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Conclusion
The main constraint of our study was the availability of annotated LOs datasets. We managed to build a
dataset of 2,394 LOs but this size was still limited. On the other hand, each LO needed to be carefully
annotated for the training data to be correct. This makes building a larger dataset a cumbersome and
difficult task to handle.
In this study, our goal was to propose a model for the automatic classification of MOOCs according to their
pedagogical approaches, and this on a large scale, based on the cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy. To
this end, we opted for BERT, and then we experimented with different strategies to fine-tune it. In this
sense, we investigated the impact of choosing different classifiers upon BERT, from a simple softmax
classifier to a more complex classifier such as dense layers, LSTM, and Bi-LSTM. The results demonstrated
that using a more complex classifier did not improve performance. Instead, it lowered accuracy on the five
classification models, which is understandable given that BERT also has deep networks and advanced
training techniques. We also demonstrated that the use of dense layers upon BERT in combination with
dropout and the activation function ReLU allowed us to reach the highest accuracy value. Although BERT
with dense layers performed well in our experiment, we have not yet explored other fine-tuning strategies.
In a future study, we will tackle other techniques such as multitask learning to enhance the performance of
our BERT model.
Overall, our proposed approach proved its ability to classify learning objectives in MOOCs. Since our
approach was based on learning objectives for the pedagogical classification of MOOCs, potential
applications to other learning objects in the context of distance learning are worth exploring in future
research and practice.
186
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
References
Abduljabbar, D. A., & Omar, N. (2015). Exam questions classification based on Bloom’s taxonomy
cognitive level using classifiers combination. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information
Technology, 78(3), 447. http://www.jatit.org/volumes/Vol78No3/15Vol78No3.pdf
Conole, G. (2014, April). The 7Cs of learning design: A new approach to rethinking design practice.
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Networked Learning (pp. 502–509).
Edinburgh, Scotland.
https://www.lancaster.ac.uk/fss/organisations/netlc/past/nlc2014/abstracts/pdf/conole.pdf
Conole, G. (2016). MOOCs as disruptive technologies: Strategies for enhancing the learner experience and
quality of MOOCs. Revista de Educación a Distancia, 50(2). http://dx.doi.org/10.6018/red/50/2
Das, S., Das Mandal, S. K., & Basu, A. (2020). Identification of cognitive learning complexity of
assessment questions using multi-class text classification. Contemporary Educational
Technology, 12(2), Article ep275. https://doi.org/10.30935/cedtech/8341
Davis, D., Seaton, D., Hauff, C., & Houben, G. J. (2018, June). Toward large-scale learning design:
Categorizing course designs in service of supporting learning outcomes. Proceedings of the Fifth
Annual ACM Conference on Learning at Scale (pp. 1–10).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3231644.3231663
Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805
González-Carvajal, S., & Garrido-Merchán, E. C. (2020). Comparing BERT against traditional machine
learning text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13012. https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.13012
Grandini, M., Bagli, E., & Visani, G. (2020). Metrics for multi-class classification: An overview. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.05756. https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.05756
Haris, S. S., & Omar, N. (2012, December). A rule-based approach in Bloom’s taxonomy question
classification through natural language processing. Seventh International Conference on
Computing and Convergence Technology (ICCCT; pp. 410–414). Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6530368
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980. https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
Kopp, M., & Lackner, E. (2014). Do MOOCs need a special instructional design? Proceedings of Sixth
International Conference on Education and New Learning (EDULEARN14; pp. 7138–7147).
Barcelona, Spain. https://library.iated.org/view/KOPP2014DOM
187
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Krathwohl, D. R. (2002). A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy: An overview. Theory into Practice, 41(4), 212–
218. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15430421tip4104_2
Major, C. H., & Blackmon, S. J. (2016). Massive open online courses: Variations on a new instructional
form. New Directions for Institutional Research, 2015(167), 11–25.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ir.20151
Margaryan, A., Bianco, M., & Littlejohn, A. (2015). Instructional quality of massive open online courses
(MOOCs). Computers & Education, 80, 77–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.08.005
Merrill, M. D. (2012). First principles of instruction. John Wiley & Sons.
https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/usufaculty_monographs/100/
Mohammed, M., & Omar, N. (2020). Question classification based on Bloom’s taxonomy cognitive
domain using modified TF-IDF and word2vec. PLOS ONE 15, e0230442.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230442
Molenda, M. (2003). In search of the elusive ADDIE model. Performance improvement, 42(5), 34-37.
http://www.damiantgordon.com/Courses/DT580/In-Search-of-Elusive-ADDIE.pdf
Nevid, J. S., & McClelland, N. (2013). Using action verbs as learning outcomes: Applying Bloom’s
taxonomy in measuring instructional objectives in introductory psychology. Journal of Education
and Training Studies, 1(2), 19–24. https://doi.org/10.11114/jets.v1i2.94
Omar, N., Haris, S. S., Hassan, R., Arshad, H., Rahmat, M., Zainal, N. F. A., & Zulkifli, R. (2012).
Automated analysis of exam questions according to Bloom's taxonomy. Procedia: Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 59, 297–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.09.278
Osman, A., & Yahya, A. A. (2016). Classifications of exam questions using linguistically-motivated
features: A case study based on Bloom’s taxonomy.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/298286164_Classifications_of_Exam_Questions_Usi
ng_Linguistically-Motivated_Features_A_Case_Study_Based_on_Blooms_Taxonomy
Pardos, Z. A., & Schneider, E. (2013). AIED 2013 workshops proceedings (Vol. 1).
http://people.cs.pitt.edu/~falakmasir/docs/AIED2013.pdf
Quintana, R. M., & Tan, Y. (2019). Characterizing MOOC pedagogies: Exploring tools and methods for
learning designers and researchers. Online Learning, 23(4), 62–84.
https://doi.org/10.24059/olj.v23i4.2084
Rosselle, M., Caron, P. A., & Heutte, J. (2014, February). A typology and dimensions of a description
framework for MOOCs. In Proceedings of European MOOCs Stakeholders Summit 2014,
(eMOOCs 2014; pp. 130–139). Lausanne, Switzerland. Proceedings document published by Open
Education Europa (www. openeducationeuropa. eu). https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-
00957025/
188
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
Sebbaq, H., El Faddouli, N. E., & Bennani, S. (2020, September). Recommender system to support
MOOCs teachers: Framework based on ontology and linked data. Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Intelligent Systems: Theories and Applications,Article 18.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3419604.3419619
Sebbaq, H., & Faddouli, N. E. E. (2021, January). MOOCs semantic interoperability: Towards unified and
pedagogically enriched model for building a linked data repository. International Conference on
Digital Technologies and Applications. Springer, 621-631.
Stanny, C. J. (2016). Reevaluating Bloom’s taxonomy: What measurable verbs can and cannot say about
student learning. Education Sciences, 6(4), 37. https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci6040037
Swan, K., Day, S., Bogle, L., & van Prooyen, T. (2014). AMP: A tool for characterizing the pedagogical
approaches of MOOCs. E-mentor, 2(54), 75–85. https://doi.org/10.15219/em54.1098
Swart, A. J., & Daneti, M. (2019, April). Analyzing learning outcomes for electronic fundamentals using
Bloom’s taxonomy. 2019 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON; pp. 39–
44). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8725137
Ting Fei, Wei Jyh Heng, Kim Chuan Toh, & Tian Qi. (2003). Question classification for e-learning by
artificial neural network. Proceedings of the Joint Fourth International Conference on
Information, Communications and Signal Processing, and the Fourth Pacific Rim Conference on
Multimedia (pp. 1757–1761). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Singapore.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICICS.2003.1292768
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., & Polosukhin, I.
(2017). Attention is all you need. 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS 2017; pp. 5998–6008). Long Beach, USA. https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762
Xing, W. (2019). Exploring the influences of MOOC design features on student performance and
persistence. Distance Education, 40(1), 98–113.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01587919.2018.1553560
Yousef, A. M. F., Chatti, M. A., Schroeder, U., & Wosnitza, M. (2014, July). What drives a successful
MOOC? An empirical examination of criteria to assure design quality of MOOCs. 14th
International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (pp. 44–48). Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICALT.2014.23
Yusof, N., Hui, C. J. (2010). Determination of Bloom’s cognitive level of question items using artificial
neural network. 10th International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications
(ISDA; pp. 866–870). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Cairo, Egypt.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISDA.2010.5687152
189
Fine-Tuned BERT Model for Large Scale and Cognitive Classification of MOOCs
Sebbaq and El Faddouli
190