Clinical Trial Information Extraction with BERT
Xiong Liu1, Greg L. Hersch2, Iya Khalil1, Murthy Devarakonda1
1Data Science and AI, Novartis, Cambridge, MA, USA
2Global Drug Development, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland
xiong.liu at novartis dot com
Abstract—Natural language processing (NLP) of clinical trial measure the NER performance of CT-BERT, as well as baseline
documents can be useful in new trial design. Here we identify models including Att-BiLSTM [5] and the conditional random
entity types relevant to clinical trial design and propose a field (CRF) model used in Criteria2Query [4].
framework called CT-BERT for information extraction from
Our contributions include: 1) we introduce a comparative
clinical trial text. We trained named entity recognition (NER)
models to extract eligibility criteria entities by fine-tuning a set of framework for clinical trial NER, which enables the building of
pre-trained BERT models. We then compared the performance of BERT-based models and the comparative study with other
CT-BERT with recent baseline methods including attention-based baseline models; 2) we provide empirical results for the impact
BiLSTM and Criteria2Query. The results demonstrate the of BERT pre-training on the performance of clinical trial NER;
superiority of CT-BERT in clinical trial NLP. 3) we show that BERT-based NER models fine-turned on
ClinicalTrials.gov data outperform baseline models.
Keywords—Clinical trials, eligibility criteria, natural language
processing, deep learning, BERT
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Clinical trial entity type system
Clinical trial designs are documented in unstructured text
The rationale for clinical trial NER is that the entity types
and natural language processing (NLP) of the documents can
must allow us to capture the key variables (entities) in trial
inform new trial design [1], [2]. The key NLP task is information
design. For eligibility criteria, we identified that the annotation
extraction, including named entity recognition (NER) and
schema in [5] is comprehensive and therefore selected it for type
relation extraction from various sections of the clinical trial
definition. It includes 15 types, covering common types in
document, such as objectives, outcomes, and eligibility criteria.
clinical text (e.g., disease, treatment, clinical variable) as well as
Clinical trial NER requires a fine-grained entity type system speciality types (e.g., consent, language frequency, technology
and large-scale annotation data in order to generate high quality access) and value ranges (e.g., lower and upper bound). We treat
models that meet the specific requirements of clinical trial the lower and upper bound entities as “attribute” entities because
design. Traditional clinical NER based on clinical text and the they are modifiers of other entities. To enable comparative study
standard problem-treatment-test annotation system may not be with Criteria2Query, we map the attribute entities and other 13
sufficient to capture critical distinctions such as allergy, consent, regular entities to the corresponding ones in Criteria2Query.
language fluency and technology access. Table I shows the detailed mapping of entities and attributes.
A number of NER methods have been developed for clinical
trial parsing, including rule-based methods [3] and machine B. CT-BERT architecture
learning-based methods [4]. More recently, deep learning-based The CT-BERT architecture includes both NER and relation
methods, such as attention-based BiLSTM (Att-BiLSTM) [5], extraction. The NER module is based on the BERT architecture.
[6], have been introduced to enable more automatic and accurate The input is clinical trial text. BERT pre-trained transformer is
extraction of entities from the eligibility criteria. Meanwhile, used as the embedding and encoding layer. And the standard
pre-trained language models, such as BERT, have demonstrated BIO tag prediction in BERT is used for entity extraction. The
superior performance over previous baselines across NLP tasks relation extraction module is used to associate attribute entities
[7], [8]. Investigating transformers for better clinical trial NER with their base entities, which will be discussed in the extended
is a promising area of research. version of the paper.
We propose a new framework, called CT-BERT, to train and We wanted to experiment with a wide range of pre-trained
evaluate information extraction models based upon publicly models, covering a wide-range from the general domain to
available clinical trials data and BERT embeddings. In this scientific articles (PubMed) and clinical documents (MIMIC III)
work, we focus on the NER task to extract entities from the so that we can assess the impact of pre-training corpora on
eligibility criteria. We leverage pre-annotated ClinicalTrials.gov information extraction from clinical trials documents.
data [5] to fine-tune a set of pre-trained BERT models for Therefore, we used publicly available pre-trained models,
clinical trial NER, including standard BERT [7], BioBERT [8], including BERT (trained on general corpus), BioBERT (trained
ClinicalBERT [9] and BlueBERT [10]. To evaluate extraction on PubMed/PMC), ClinicalBERT (trained on MIMIC), and
quality, we use the benchmark dataset described in [4] to BlueBERT (trained on PubMed or PubMed + MIMIC).
TABLE I. ENTITIES AND ATTRIBUTES IN CT-BERT AND MAPPING TO We compared our fine-tuned BioBERT large with Att-
CRITERIA2QUERY
BiLSTM and Criteria2Query using the benchmark data. Table
CT-BERT Class Criteria2Query Example II shows that the F1 scores are 0.844, 0.802, and 0.804, for the
Class models respectively. This shows the benefit of using BERT-
Entity Age Demographic Age based models in clinical trial information extraction.
Allergy name Condition Hypersensitivity to
nivolumab
TABLE II. PERFORMANCE OF NER MODELS ON THE 10-TRIAL
BMI Measurement Body mass index
EVALUATION DATASET
Cancer Condition Thymoma
Chronic disease Condition Inflammatory disease Evaluation Precision Recall F1
Clinical variable Measurement Arterial Oxygen CT-BERT model 0.953 0.758 0.844
Saturation (fine-tuned on (163/171) (163/215)
Contraception Not found not willing to use BioBERT large)
consent double barrier methods Att-BiLSTM 0.911 0.716 0.802
of contraception (154/169) (154/215)
Ethnicity Observation Residents of Puerto Criteria2Query 0.902 0.726 0.804
Rico (CRF) (156/173) (156/215)
Gender Demographic Men and women
Language fluency Not found Unable to read IV. CONCLUSIONS
Pregnancy Condition Pregnancy
In this study, we introduced a new framework CT-BERT and
Technology Not found Electronic patient diary
trained NER models to leverage BERT-based modeling for
access
clinical trial information extraction. We studied how pre-trained
Treatment Procedure | drug Solid organ
transplantation | BERT models may impact the NER performance. We found that
immune-checkpoint BioBERT large pre-trained on PubMed/PMC works best for the
inhibitors clinical trial domain. We further evaluated our NER models on
Attribute Lower bound Value Age over 18 years
a benchmark data. The result showed that CT-BET outperforms
Upper bound Value daily opioid dose <=
baseline models including Att-BiLSTM and Criteria2Query.
160 mg/day
Collectively, CT-BERT shows significant improvement in
model quality. Getting high accuracy in information extraction
We adapted the dataset in [5] for NER fine-tuning. The paves the way for automatic AI-driven clinical trial design.
original data uses its own off-set representation schema. We
transformed the dataset into the standard BIO representation
REFERENCES
schema. The training data includes 102,985 entities in 40,876
[1] D. B. Fogel. Factors associated with clinical trials that fail and
criteria sentences and the test data includes 11,317 entities in
opportunities for improving the likelihood of success: a review, Contemp.
4,482 criteria sentences. We used the training data to fine tune
Clin. Trials Commun., 11, pp. 156-164, 2018.
the pre-trained BERT models and used the test data to measure
[2] Z. Chen, X. Liu, W. Hogan, E. Shenkman, and J. Bian. Applications of
the model performance. artificial intelligence in drug development using real-world data. Drug
Discovery Today, 2020. DOI: 10.1016/j.drudis.2020.12.013.
C. Evaluation of methods [3] S. W. Tu, M. Peleg, S. Carini et al. A practical method for transforming
free-text eligibility criteria into computable criteria. J Biomed
To test CT-BERT NER models, we used a publicly available
Inform; 44 (2): 239–50, 2011.
benchmark from [4]. It includes 10 clinical trials and 125 criteria
[4] C. Yuan, P.B. Ryan, C. Ta, Y. Guo, Z. Li, J. Hardin, et al., Criteria2Query:
sentences randomly sampled from ClinicalTrials.gov. The same a natural language interface to clinical databases for cohort
10-trial evaluation data has been used to evaluate Att-BiLSTM definition, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
and Criteria2Query. We used the precision, recall and F1 metrics 2019.
described in the Att-BiLSTM [5] and Criteria2Query [4] work. [5] Y. Tseo, M. I. Salkola, A. Mohamed, A. Kumar, F. Abnousi. Information
extraction of clinical trial eligibility criteria. arXiv preprint arXiv:
The studies employed exact match for entity type but a partial
2006.07296, 2020.
match for the entity span.
[6] X. Liu, L. A. Finelli, G. L. Hersch, and I. Khalil. Attention-based LSTM
network for COVID-19 clinical trial parsing. IEEE International
III. RESULTS
Conference on Big Data, December 2020, Atlanta, GA, USA.
As in previous studies, we also observed that the pre-training [7] J. Devlin, M. W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
corpora have an impact on the NER performance, with certain bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint
additional nuances. BioBERT large pre-trained on PubMed and arXiv:181004805. 2018.
PMC achieves the best F1 score of 0.781 measured on the test [8] J. Lee, W. Yoon, S. Kim, et al. BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical
language representation model for biomedical text mining.
data. The models pre-trained on MIMIC achieve an average F1
Bioinformatics;36(4):1234-1240, 2020.
of 0.773. While the models pre-trained on the PubMed + MIMIC
[9] E. Alsentzer, J. R. Murphy, W. Boag, W. H. Weng, D. Jin, T. Naumann,
corpora have the lowest average F1 of 0.768. This confirms our
and M. McDermott. Publicly available clinical BERT embeddings. arXiv
intuition that clinical trials look more like published papers than preprint arXiv:1904.03323, 2019.
clinical notes. And the combination of PubMed and MIMIC may [10] Y. Peng, S. Yan, and Z. Lu. Transfer learning in biomedical natural
have introduced biased contexts that are not representative of language processing: an evaluation of BERT and ELMo on ten
clinical trial documents. benchmarking datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05474, 2019.